Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

INTERVIEW

“Bridging the gap between people and technology” 

Interview with Alessandra Perrazzelli, Deputy Governor of the Banca d’Italia
        and Member of the Supervisory Board of the ECB, Supervision Newsletter

19 February 2025

Banca d’Italia has done a lot of work on technology. What’s the vision of the recently set SSM tech
            strategy for 2024-28? 

The new SSM tech strategy for 2024-28 is centred around a key idea: recognising that people and technology are
        more closely connected than ever before. Disruptive technologies have radically transformed how we work and, in
        recent years, many innovative tools have been developed. Now it’s time to craft a unified strategy that bridges
        the gap between people and technology. Our goal is to ensure that supervisors can fully leverage the
        applications and data at their disposal, with technology seamlessly integrated into their everyday tasks. We
        also aim to consolidate IT to reinforce European banking supervision, fostering collaboration among supervisors
        as a unified team and using shared technology across both the ECB and the national competent authorities (NCAs).
    

How does Banca d’Italia’s work on suptech contribute to the broader network of European banking
            supervision? 

Banca d’Italia, the ECB and the other European competent authorities are increasingly adopting innovative
        techniques and tools in their supervisory activities.

The challenges that we face, in response to both the digital transformation and the structural changes occurring
        in the banking sector, call for a comprehensive, well-coordinated and cooperative approach. In this vein, the
        SSM has adopted a cooperative approach among European supervisors (the suptech centres), where each NCA can
        contribute its expertise and technology, making them available to the ECB and other NCAs. 

Here at Banca d’Italia, our staff contribute to the SSM projects and we’re also ready to share our suptech tools.
        We’ve put several tools into production to help supervisors perform their tasks. As an example, we developed an
        innovative tool for the fit and proper (FAP) assessment of board members and company managers, which uses
        artificial intelligence (AI) to analyse the members’ profiles. Another tool helps on-site inspectors write
        consistent reports.

I believe we’re on the right track, but we still need to step up our efforts to make it work. Together, we’ve
        been able to tackle many significant challenges over the past ten years. We trust that together we can continue
        to do so in the future.

Considering suptech, what’s in store for banks? 

The emerging interest in the adoption of suptech tools isn’t limited to the teams of supervisors. The way in
        which supervisors can process large amounts of data remains of key interest for banks. The growing use of some
        tools – such as Agora, which provides a single data lake for SSM supervisors, or Heimdall, which enables a fast
        pre-screening of FAP applications – has the power to speed up supervisors’ work and, in turn, their
        responsiveness to banks. We expect significant efficiency gains for banks as well, and a potentially more
        targeted supervisory approach. 

Let’s take the tools just mentioned. Thanks to Agora, supervisors can easily compare different datasets and
        benchmark their assessment of a supervised bank. Similarly Heimdall, through its automatic reading of the FAP
        application, can flag any potential issues to supervisors and deliver a first draft assessment; moreover, thanks
        to its database of historical data, peer comparisons are immediately available. In the end, all suptech tools
        have the same objectives: reducing the potential for human error, streamlining supervisory assessments and
        enhancing supervisors’ credibility. At the same time, the interaction with banks will be streamlined and more
        effective. 

What technological innovations are you most excited about?

AI is arguably the most promising and exciting innovation in banking supervision. By analysing vast amounts of
        data, AI can support supervisors in assessing banks’ compliance with regulatory requirements and help develop
        early warning systems to detect emerging risks or vulnerabilities. To keep pace with the rapid evolution of AI
        and technology, it’s crucial that we continuously refine our skills, methods and tools. However, these
        advancements also bring new complexities that require careful consideration, particularly with regard to
        generative AI. While automation offers great potential, we must ensure that human expertise remains at the heart
        of our decision-making processes. Regardless of how advanced technology becomes, ultimate responsibility for
        decisions should not rest with automated systems. AI can assist and enhance our work, but it can’t replace the
        critical judgement and experience of supervisory authorities and skilled bankers.

The line between banks and non-bank service providers has become blurry. Is Europe still in a position to
            follow the the principle of “same risk, same activity, same regulation”? 

The principle of “same risk, same activity, same regulation” remains central to European financial oversight, but
        its application is increasingly being challenged as the activities of banks and non-bank service providers often
        overlap.

Fintech, big tech and other non-bank entities are introducing innovative services, while posing risks similar to
        those of banks – including financial stability concerns and operational vulnerabilities. Yet much of this
        non-bank financial intermediation – particularly the most innovative aspects – often lies outside the
        traditional regulatory framework. It’s crucial to find the right balance, i.e. addressing risks effectively
        while allowing innovation to thrive and ensuring the continued provision of essential financial services.

While regulatory frameworks take time to be fully developed, supervisors cannot afford to wait for legislation to
        address these emerging risks. Proactive measures are critical to staying ahead of evolving market dynamics. The
        SSM is called on to work closely with other authorities to foster coordination and information-sharing, ensuring
        a consistent and effective response across the financial ecosystem. The implementation of the Markets in
        Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCAR) and the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) will further reshape
        this landscape, requiring increased collaboration.

You just mentioned the EU Regulation DORA . Will it be enough to address growing IT risks? 

DORA is certainly a significant step towards the objective of harnessing the benefits of digital finance while
        ensuring its stability and resilience. The new Regulation aims to strengthen the digital operational resilience
        of the whole financial system by empowering all the actors involved in the provision of financial services and
        providing all financial entities with a framework for managing technological risks. However, regulation alone is
        never sufficient, and it needs to be accompanied by an increased awareness among all parties of the importance
        of these risks. Technological interconnectedness and concentration are at play, hence risk can propagate across
        the system through unexpected contagion channels. This calls for a joint effort, from which no one can consider
        themself exempt.

At ten years old, the SSM has been praised as a successful project. Is there a broader lesson from this
            experience for Europe?

The SSM has combined our supervisory cultures and operational experiences, fostering an unprecedented “one team
        spirit” approach among colleagues from the national supervisory authorities and the ECB. It has built upon the
        legacies of national supervisory bodies while remaining driven by a common European vision. Indeed, if we look
        back at the genesis of the project, we cannot forget the sense of urgency that drove us when we were building up
        the first network of European authorities to share powers, tools and resources. 

While the creation of the SSM is surely a success story, considering the numerous achievements in its first
        decade, the key lesson we have learnt from the SSM is, once again, that a truly united Europe is not only
        possible, but also desirable. Together, we have demonstrated that our tasks and objectives, when they are
        pursued with a European perspective, can be achieved more effectively and efficiently, with positive
        consequences for all European citizens. 

We often repeat that Europe is forged in times of crisis; the SSM was born as part of a more ambitious scheme,
        the banking union, in order to tackle the fallout of the sovereign debt crisis and the vicious circle involving
        the banks. Since we are living proof that Europe can make things better together, we should not wait for the
        next crisis. Instead, we should be proud of our achievements and be brave: let’s advance European cooperation in
        all the fields where we know that the longer-term benefits for citizens will outweigh the risk of losing powers
        or political consensus. In our restricted area of competence, i.e. banking union, this means in practice that it
        is time to adopt the European deposit insurance scheme (EDIS), as the technical justifications for postponing
        the adoption have nowadays been superseded.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify