Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

INTERVIEW

“Maximum harmonisation with minimal rules”

Interview with Kilvar Kessler, Chair of Finantsinspektsioon and Member of the
        Supervisory Board of the ECB, Supervision Newsletter

14 May 2025

Estonia is a pioneer in digital banking and you encourage banks to use more digital solutions. What
            motivated you to drive this forward?

In my opinion, Estonia’s leadership in digital banking boils down to two things: business needs and a strong
        tradition of computer science. This tradition came about because historically, in the Soviet planned economy,
        Estonia happened to be the home of a couple of science institutes specialising in computers and programming.
        These institutes were located in Estonia because the level of education there was very high. We consequently
        had, and still have, a good body of engineers and scientists who are more than fluent in programming and IT.

The second reason was the business need to cut the costs of labour and bricks and mortar bank branches. The banks
        did not suffer from legacy issues and could therefore build their business using state-of-the-art technologies.
        Finantsinspektsioon has had IT auditors working with it since it was established at the beginning of this
        century. This means we have maintained the role of supervisor and we make sure IT risks are properly managed,
        leaving the rest up to the market.

Have you seen an uptick in cyberattacks since Russia’s invasion of Ukraine in 2022?

Our history of cyberattacks started in 2007 when Estonia’s banks and other institutions were massively attacked
        for the first time by foreign, state-related bad actors. Since then we have learned how to deal with cyber
        threats. However, it is a constant game of cat and mouse, where the main responsibility is with telecom service
        providers, financial intermediaries and certain other actors, and cooperation between these parties is critical.
    

Yes, there has been a slight uptick in cyberattacks recently. Consumers have generally not noticed disruptions in
        banking services, as overall the countermeasures have worked properly.

European banking supervision is ready to impose the first periodic penalty payments. What is your
            experience of bank penalties? 

For me, penalties are one of the tools in the supervisory toolbox, as foreseen in the legal acts. Supervisors
        should not hesitate to use them at the appropriate time, alongside other measures, to send a signal to
        wrongdoers and to the market as a whole. However, penalties should be used in a proportionate manner.

We do not impose monetary penalties frequently, but in serious cases we do as our policy foresees. Our experience
        is that the deterrent nature of a penalty along with making the penalty public has an even bigger impact than
        the actual measure itself. One thing to note about using the measure is that the legal team should be ready not
        only to draft penalty decisions and provide reasons for them, but also to defend these decisions successfully in
        the courts.

A few prominent anti-money laundering cases in Estonia, such as those of Danske Bank and Swedbank in
            recent years, have shown that open markets can come with risks. What lessons have you drawn from these cases
            and what safeguards do you have in place?

One lesson we learned is that supervisors should never lose their curiosity. Frankly speaking, we discussed these
        risks in quite some depth with our Baltic friends during the meetings when the single supervisory mechanism
        (SSM) was being set up. I think these discussions would never have taken place if the SSM hadn’t brought us
        closer together. Another thing we learned is that it takes courage to tackle some serious, outstanding risks
        proactively, especially if they might not be that visible to stakeholders or the public at large. The third
        lesson we learned is that you have to show, in a credible way, that entering into a questionable, risky business
        without risk controls in place will end up with you having to exit the business.

At the current juncture, we have good processes and systems in place that help us understand and measure the
        respective risks. Moreover, we have an excellent team that has become highly experienced in handling complex
        cases. And we have put an effective cooperation network in place. We are very much looking forward to the
        Authority for Anti-Money Laundering and Countering the Financing of Terrorism (AMLA) being set up and to sharing
        our experience with them.

The Estonian banking sector is relatively small and concentrated, with foreign banks dominating the
            market. How important is proportionality for Estonia as part of European banking supervision? 

In recent years, local banks have gained market share and foreign banks have lost some. However, I would say that
        all banks operating in the Baltics are small or medium-sized banks. Sometimes our common rulebook is pretty
        burdensome for smaller institutions. This means that supervisors should really understand the context and merits
        of a business in addition to going through all the aspects formally. 

I have also noticed that there are cultural differences in doing business. For example, Scandinavian financial
        organisations rely on a bit less formal set-up, while the continental European approach seems to appreciate
        quite detailed, written processes. At the same time, both approaches have produced good financial and business
        results. I therefore very much welcome European banking supervision’s move towards more risk-based supervision.
    

Considering the current global push for deregulation, do you see room for streamlining rules and
            reporting obligations in Europe? 

We supervisors have learned that rules are our friends in supporting financial stability and transparency. But
        limiting failure too close to zero sometimes means that creativity suffers, as bankers are not incentivised to
        take a risk to boost new businesses. Fewer new businesses with good creativity means fewer successes and less
        added value. I see some room for easing the rules. 

Deregulation at the EU level should, however, not be a vehicle for Member States to build their own internal
        rules in a way that effectively makes their markets more difficult to access. I consequently believe that the
        European Union should consider taking the path of maximum harmonisation, but with only the minimum of necessary
        rules within it. These should be principle-based rules. I think this would work at least in places where we have
        joint mechanisms in place, such as the SSM and the Single Resolution Mechanism.

You have been a member of the Supervisory Board from the very beginning of the Single Supervisory
            Mechanism. What have your observations been over the years? Where can it improve further? 

First, integrating with the SSM and becoming a part of it was a huge leap forward for Finantsinspektsioon. We
        gained direct access to a vast database and very deep pool of know-how. Finantsinspektsioon was given the chance
        to share its experience of supervising IT risks and of conservative and risk-based prudential supervision, among
        other things. I cannot underestimate the personal and professional contacts that being a part of the SSM has
        created for all of us. It is my experience that, especially during crises, personal trust and a close connection
        between supervisors has a very, very high value. 

I like the current trend, at least from our point of view, where the central authority trusts the national
        competent authorities and their judgement more. This links nicely with our risk tolerance project that I like to
        call “risk-based supervision”. Moreover, I applaud the digitalisation work that the ECB as central authority has
        done and is doing in banking supervision, as this is directly linked to the efficiency of the whole system. 

Looking ahead, I think we need to analyse whether on-site inspections are arranged in the best possible way. I
        was surprised to learn that cross-border, on-site missions are not that common, as in Estonia all incoming
        on-site visits in prudential banking supervision have been cross-border. Another broader and pressing question
        is how European banking supervisors see themselves in the overall value proposition. Should we strongly voice
        our opinion on cross-border mergers and acquisitions, or remain neutral? Should we have an even better
        understanding that the structural changes in banking requested by the ECB may have positive but also negative
        impacts on a Member State’s economy? 

Overall, I am very happy with how European banking supervision has developed over the years and I am optimistic
        about the current path we have taken.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify