Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Anneli Tuominen
ECB representative to the the Supervisory  Board

ARTICLE 
Banks in a changing global landscape
Contribution by Anneli Tuominen, Member of the Supervisory Board of the ECB, for the Eurofi Magazine
Warsaw, 8 April 2025
While European banks have been resilient to large external shocks in recent years, there are unfortunately few signs of a “steady state” being within reach anytime soon in an environment marked by lingering uncertainty. At the global level, geopolitical risks remain high, shifts in macroeconomic policies by major players are possible, and regulatory uncertainties persist concerning the outlook for the full implementation of the Basel III reforms in key jurisdictions outside the EU. In Europe, the banking union remains incomplete as its third pillar of common deposit insurance is still missing, and progress on reinforcing our crisis management system (on the basis of proposals tabled by the Commission in 2023) has stalled. However, the recent strength that banks have shown in crisis episodes has led some commentators to question whether these improvements are really needed, instead arguing that capital requirements should be relaxed so that banks can be more competitive in financing the economy.
In the remainder of this contribution, I will outline how we can deal with these challenges and thereby reconcile policy objectives which may at first appear to conflict with each other.
Dealing with geopolitical risks and macroeconomic uncertainty
Geopolitical risks have the potential to affect both traditional and new risks in a multifaceted way that cuts across established categories. Potential changes in macroeconomic policies by large global actors could amplify such vulnerabilities, for example by compounding credit risks faced by banks in the context of a more sluggish economic growth outlook. Rising geopolitical risks in recent years have also been associated with an increase in reported cyber incidents. This has put banks’ operational resilience and risk management frameworks under the spotlight.
[
1
]
 
We are aware that geopolitical risks are difficult to measure, especially in an environment of uncertainty. But we are asking banks to make an effort to take such risks into account in their scenario planning through the channels which they consider most relevant for their own business, and to make contingency arrangements for their risk management and governance practices accordingly. This also suggests that the principle which has served banks well thus far, which is that robust capitalisation is the first line of defence to guard against unforeseen external shocks, will continue to remain valid going forward. 
Fostering a more efficient supervisory and regulatory framework
Several efforts are underway to streamline parts of the overall supervisory and regulatory framework in order to reduce its complexity. Last year, we announced a number of reforms to our annual bank health check to ensure that it is more risk-based.
[
2
]
 With this guiding principle in mind, we are now looking at which other supervisory processes could benefit from a similar approach to make them more effective. The European Commission recently put forward proposals to simplify corporate sustainability reporting amongst others (the “Omnibus” packages).
[
3
]
 The ECB is contributing with measures to harmonise banks’ statistical reporting. We have developed a database to keep track of ad hoc reporting requests to banks, and joint initiatives are underway with other European and national authorities as well as with the banking industry which should bear fruit in the medium term.
[
4
]
 The European Banking Authority is also looking to create a task force on simplification to carry out an overall review of the single rulebook.
While there is scope for additional regulatory streamlining, this should not come at the expense of banks’ overall resilience.  We should avoid repeating past mistakes where banks were often at the root of, or contributed to the amplification of, crisis episodes. Rather than debating the purported need to lower banks’ capital requirements, which I would not favour, we should instead focus on boosting competitiveness through a more integrated system with harmonised requirements. This is also why it is important to complete the banking union as originally envisaged.
Conclusion
In a changing global landscape, the current debate on how to improve the growth and competitiveness of the European economy is welcome. Recent developments suggest that increased spending in defence will be needed going forward, which will come on top of the large financing needs related to the green transition. There are clear limitations as to what banks can reasonably be asked to do in these domains, which is why it remains critical to advance plans to establish a capital markets union. It is a good time for all stakeholders concerned to further buttress the resilience of the European financial sector.
 	Tuominen, A. (2025), “
Operational resilience in the digital age
”, 
The Supervision Blog
, ECB, 17 January. 
 	Buch, C. (2024), “
Reforming the SREP: an important milestone towards more efficient and effective supervision in a new risk environment
”, 
The Supervision Blog
, ECB, 28 May. 
 	European Commission (2025), “
Commission proposes to cut red tape and simplify business environment
”, 26 February. 
 	These initiatives include the Integrated Reporting Framework, the Joint Bank Reporting Committee and the Banks’ Integrated Reporting Dictionary. See “
Making banks’ data reporting more efficient
” on the ECB’s website. 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify