Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Anneli Tuominen
ECB representative to the the Supervisory  Board

INTERVIEW
Interview with Público
Interview with Anneli Tuominen, Member of the Supervisory Board of the ECB, conducted by Diogo Cavaleiro on 10 July 2025
16 July 2025
The Guide on outsourcing cloud services aims to minimise the risk related to banks’ exposure to external cloud providers. Are the banks too reliant on these external providers?
Practically all banks have outsourced contracts for cloud-based critical functions, so they are heavily dependent on third parties. We estimate that the share of critical functions that are outsourced to third parties and are difficult or impossible to substitute is around 82%. It’s a problem from the point of view of continuity, concentration and good risk management. Banks need to realise what’s at stake.
The market for cloud computing services is tiny. What is the main concern? Is it nationality? Are there a lot of US providers?
We are mainly concerned about the issue of concentration, as there aren’t many providers of these services in the market. Regarding nationality, service providers with their headquarters in the EU are easier to supervise and monitor, and there may be some jurisdictions that are riskier than others. But given the jurisdictions where cloud services are presently located, we don’t have that problem. Of course, geopolitical risk needs to be taken into account, but all the banks and all the supervisors already understand that.
Are these external providers an entry point for cyberattacks in these times of geopolitical tensions?
Let me put it this way: cyberattacks are everywhere. There are cyberattacks against banks, infrastructure, hospitals – anywhere. We need to be extremely resilient, irrespective of the service provider. Although resilience has greatly improved, it needs to improve further. All these service providers take cyber risk very seriously. The problem is that criminals are sometimes a step ahead of us, but we need to fight back. In short, I don’t see any specific concern in this context regarding these service providers, because it’s the same for everyone. 
What is the main difference between the final Guide and the first draft?
We received somewhere in the region of 700 comments, and 60% of them have been incorporated. For instance, the Guide is now more aligned with the language of the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA), which covers operational resilience for the entire financial sector, while our Guide focuses on cloud services. We also sharpened the language to clarify that the Guide is not binding. Instead, we specify what we consider to be good practices. They provide examples of how to properly manage risk, and about how to exit from contracts and what the alternatives are, among other things.
What is the most important outcome from this Guide?
To put it simply, I would say awareness. It helps banks understand, what needs to be taken into account and considered before entering into an outsourcing contract and how to exit from the contract if necessary. And it also emphasises the need to train bank staff on these services, so they know how they function in practice. Consequently, it’s something that will help raise banks’ awareness and improve their risk management – ultimately making them more resilient.
Did you expect to receive so many comments?
It’s difficult to predict how many comments each consultation will get. Banks were concerned that we would introduce new, binding requirements which would be difficult, expensive, or outright impossible to implement. But it’s clearly set out that this Guide is not binding and that it’s about good practices, and this is the main message that we want to convey.
Is the ECB favouring good practices instead of new rules?
Because the Guide is not binding, there are no new rules in it, just good practices we have identified and our interpretation of relevant regulations like DORA. Of course, there is much talk about simplification, but this is the case for every Guide we issue. Our objective is to help banks understand our expectations and how they can improve the way they manage risks. It helps them understand the full picture. 
Do banks respond positively to these good practices? Isn’t this a way for the ECB to be the “good cop” instead of the “bad cop”?
I think we are always the good cop. We are all in the same boat, we want more resilience in the market. It’s not in the interest of banks to get into difficulties, so we need to be vigilant on this topic. 
Banks are always complaining that fit and proper procedures and acquisition procedures take too long. Is there room for simplification?
We have already simplified that quite a lot, and we are also looking at our decision-making processes to check how we deal with authorisations and with banks’ internal models, but we have already streamlined it quite a bit. Of course, a certain amount of information is always necessary for us to be able to assess the situation and do our job as supervisors. It’s only in severe cases that we need to take a more in-depth look and then there are reasons for doing so. 
Crypto-assets is one of the areas that the European authorities are still working on. Should the ECB have more powers, or is this not an issue that it needs to be concerned about? 
Personally, I’m not a great fan of crypto-assets at all. They don’t have any real value and for the most part, they are used for speculation and also by criminals. 
At present the banks’ exposure is very limited. But as we’ve seen with the United States, the market is growing and there’s a great deal of interest, so there could be a risk of contagion to the proper functioning of the financial market itself. Of course, the Markets in Crypto-Assets Regulation (MiCAR) is something that should help, but the issue is that the significant crypto-asset service providers are not supervised by any European authority. And that’s certainly something that should be done. I’m not saying that it should be the ECB. It could be the European Securities and Markets Authority (ESMA) or another institution. But anyway, there should be proper regulation and supervision for this market.
You talked about crime. Do you believe that this is an area that is favourable for money laundering?
Yes, indeed. Criminal use of crypto-assets is certainly a problem. But we are not the authority for this area. AMLA is the new anti-money laundering authority here in Frankfurt.
What is happening with the relationship with AMLA? 
As supervisors, we act on concerns about money laundering that can have an impact on banks’ safety and soundness. For example, we look at risks related to money laundering when granting licences or when making fit and proper assessments. 
Previously we worked with the European Banking Authority (EBA), which had some of the duties that passed to AMLA when it commenced operations at the start of July. We have already signed a Memorandum of Understanding with AMLA in which we ensure the exchange of information: it’s extremely important for them to receive information from us, and vice versa, for our supervisory activity. We need this information for authorisations, fit and proper assessments, withdrawal of licences, and so forth. 
The Memorandum of Understanding sets out the cooperation in detail. And we have other channels – for instance, I am an observer on AMLA’s General Board and we have experts in working groups. It’s important that we are able to collaborate with AMLA because it’s in the general interest that we are able to fight crime. So I do not foresee any difficulties.
Are banks still a target for money laundering, or do you believe that the banking sector is winning the battle?
We are not, nor have we ever been, the anti-money laundering authority. But according to the EBA there are still some areas for improvement, such as transaction monitoring and reporting suspicious transactions. In the future artificial intelligence (AI) could lend great support to banks’ operations, because it’s easier to detect these suspicious transactions with AI.
Regarding consolidation, in Portugal it’s been announced that France’s BPCE is buying Novo Banco. As this is a cross-border consolidation, is it a good thing from the ECB’s point of view?
When it comes to consolidation, I would first emphasise that there needs to be a good business case for it, because otherwise it doesn’t make sense. To improve efficiency, domestic consolidation is good, but cross-border consolidation is also good. As supervisors, we look at whether the end result is a healthy, viable bank. That includes having sound governance and complying with the prudential requirements. If that is the case, we don’t have anything against it. 
In Portugal, CaixaBank was in the running for Novo Banco, but the Portuguese Government stated that it was not interested in the expansion of Spanish players. Spain, Italy and Germany have all used powers in banking operations. Is that normal?
Politicians do what politicians do. We don’t have any view on that. It’s not in our remit. It may be something for competition authorities to look into, but we don’t interfere there.
Don’t you regard it as external pressure on banking business? Isn’t it a concern from the point of view of prudential supervision? 
We concentrate on our supervisory duties and check the soundness of business models. That is our task. 
You won’t get political comments from me. The only comment you could get would be on Ukraine, but that’s the one and only area.
What is needed in order to have more cross-border banking consolidation in the euro area?
We don’t differentiate between national and cross-border mergers from a prudential point of view. But the reality is that the European banking market is still not fully integrated, which throws up some hurdles for banks that wish to consolidate across borders. 
In any case, if the cost-to-income ratio – which is the ratio of costs to bank profits – is high, it might make sense to try to consolidate in order to achieve some efficiency gains. This could take the form of domestic or cross-border consolidation. It’s clear that size can increase efficiency, but that’s not 100% certain because there are mergers that were not so successful. So we need to look at them on a case-by-case basis by assessing the business model and its soundness. 
This brings me to banking union and the European Deposit Insurance Scheme. What are the obstacles?
I don’t know how long this discussion has been going on – as long as I can remember. There is us and there is the Single Resolution Board, which are two important pillars, but the third one is still missing. There are a lot of domestic and political interests at play here, but there seems to be scope during the Danish EU presidency, from July to December this year, to make progress on the proposal in order to take new steps with regard to the bank crisis management and deposit insurance (CMDI) framework. But of course much remains to be done, including on a European Deposit Insurance Scheme (EDIS). We hope that we don’t have to go through another crisis before we get all three pillars in place.
Are you optimistic about that?
I am more optimistic in the current geopolitical situation, because it has made us in Europe realise that we need to be stronger and more resilient in many ways. And of course completing banking union would make Europe stronger and more integrated.
How can countries like Germany be convinced that common deposit protection is a good idea?
We need to look at the big picture. And if it’s not possible, then we need to understand that the alternatives are worse. 
With the creation of big geopolitical blocs, is the market shrinking for European banks? 
I don’t believe the market is shrinking. Of course, there is a great deal of competition from different jurisdictions – mainly the United States – but there’s room for European banks to finance the economy. And of course we have the non-bank sector, which is growing and which we need to have a better look at in order to understand the exposures that banks have.
Is that something you are looking at in this year’s stress tests?
We are finalising the stress tests for this year and we will get the results in early August. In parallel, we’re conducting an analysis of counterparty credit risk for some banks. This will help us gauge how vulnerable they are to interlinkages with non-banks. And next year we will have a different type of stress test, namely a “reverse” stress test on geopolitical risks.
What does that mean? 
The starting point is that we provide the outcome of the stress test and then the banks need to determine what kind of scenarios would lead to that outcome. This is different to our usual stress tests, in which we provide a scenario and banks need to look at what outcome that would create. 
Every two years, we conduct stress tests on a specific type of risk. Last year we did a test on cyber resilience, and in 2022 we did one on climate-related risk in 2022. Next year, we will focus on geopolitical risks. Banks will need to look at areas like their operational risk, liquidity and business models, but it won’t be as detailed as the stress test we have now, which is conducted by the EBA. It will use the reporting templates and structures that banks already have in place, which should minimise additional costs and effort for them. 
Can you explain more about how the reverse stress test is performed? Currently we have a macroeconomic scenario and the banks need to calculate how they can withstand that shock. How is this done in reverse?
This is only an example, because the test is still being developed: a bank might be asked to assume that its CET1 capital ratio decreases by 300 basis points, and then it will need to work out what kind of geopolitical scenarios could cause that to happen.
Can you give a general idea about this year’s stress tests?
The tests this year were the regular test conducted by the EBA, and the parallel stress test we conduct for the banks that the EBA’s test doesn’t cover. Since banks have been profitable recently, we can assume that the end result verifies their resilience. We will have a better perspective when the results are released.
Going back to banking sector risks, is geopolitical risk the main concern now?
It’s one of our main concerns. Geopolitical means so many things: it can refer to war, tariffs, the effect on operational risk, on liquidity. So it’s good that banks are healthy. The CET1 capital ratio is at 15.9% and leverage and liquidity ratios are good and stable. We are now seeing a slight deterioration in credit quality and the level of non-performing loans is close to 2%. We are looking at credit risk more closely because there’s a great deal of uncertainty in the economy owing to tariffs and trade restrictions that could have an impact on companies’ results. We are also focusing on operational resilience, which is extremely important and one of banks’ key concerns. And there is also work for the future. It’s important that banks try to improve their IT resilience and that they invest enough in IT. We are not only talking about the cyber risk side, but also the concern about hybrid risk and misinformation and disinformation. Digitalisation and the use of AI has made banks much more efficient but has also exposed them to more risks, which they need to account for. In most cases, AI improves efficiency and processes, but we need to understand that we cannot be blind to its risks.
Do you think it is completely acceptable for European banks to finance the defence industry?
Yes, of course. But on the other hand, it’s not for us to tell banks who to lend or not lend to. We simply ask them to manage their risks accordingly. 
A few years ago it was something that banks couldn’t do: risk policies forbade it. And now it’s completely open.
Now only financing of “controversial weapons” is usually a red line. Of course, governments have a central role to play in the financing of defence, but defence financing can be part of banks’ activities. It is important, given the situation today.
In these times, what is the most difficult thing about being a member of the ECB’s Supervisory Board? 
I asked one banker the same question and his answer was “planning”. Planning is the most difficult thing because there is too much uncertainty in the world. Of course, the same applies to us because we need to be prepared for all scenarios. And this is why we want to keep the banking sector resilient. 
As we know, there is much talk about simplification, which we support where it concerns regulation, capital requirements, reporting and supervisory processes. But this cannot come at the cost of resilience. We don’t want to see a repeat of what happened after the global financial crisis, when large banks had a huge contagion effect. The Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) has been in operation for ten years now, and it has been quite successful because the banks’ soundness has greatly improved. 
One area that concerns me in the current geopolitical situation is operational resilience, because the risks are increasing all the time and attackers are often state-sponsored and have all the means, money-wise, and all the expertise to launch all kinds of tricks. And this means that banks need to be prepared and spend more on improving resilience.
I know that nationalities are not something that is looked at in supervision, but do you have any opinion on the Portuguese banking sector?
I can only say that there has been a huge and impressive improvement. We have very good cooperation with our colleagues at the Banco de Portugal. 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify