Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

June 2007

Payment Systems and Market Infrastructure

Progress report on TARGET2

On 21 June 2007 the Governing Council took decisions, based on a progress report on TARGET2, in respect of outstanding pricing and financing issues. The report contains the final version of the General Functional Specifications as well as information on legal issues relating to recent changes to the envisaged functionality of the Single Shared Platform and on testing and migration activities. It has been published on the ECB’s website today.

International and European Cooperation

The sixth “Review of the international role of the euro”

On 21 June 2007 the Governing Council approved the publication of the sixth “Review of the international role of the euro” on the ECB’s website at the end of June 2007. The Review, which this year exceptionally covers 18 months from mid-2005 to end-2006, examines the role of the euro in global markets and countries outside the euro area, and aims to enhance understanding of the current state of internationalisation of the euro, identifying the main developments and underlying trends.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on Greek legislation relating to credit and financial institutions

On 15 June 2007, at the request of the Greek Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the supervision of credit and financial institutions and on eligible collateral for monetary policy operations (CON/2007/15). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Maltese minimum reserve requirements

On 15 June 2007, at the request of the Central Bank of Malta, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the calculation of minimum reserve requirements and related procedures (CON/2007/16). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Italian supervisory authorities

On 18 June 2007, at the request of the Italian Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the regulation and supervision of markets and the functioning of the competent independent authorities (CON/2007/17). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on access to payment transaction data in Slovenia

On 20 June 2007, at the request of the Slovenian Ministry of Justice, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on amendments to the law on payment transactions regarding access to data from the register of transaction accounts (CON/2007/18). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

Statistics

ECB Guideline and Recommendation on balance of payments and international investment position statistics

On 31 May 2007 the Governing Council adopted a Guideline amending Guideline ECB/2004/15 on the statistical reporting requirements of the European Central Bank in the field of balance of payments and international investment position statistics, and the international reserves template (ECB/2007/3), and a related Recommendation amending Recommendation ECB/2004/16 on the statistical reporting requirements of the European Central Bank in the field of balance of payments and international investment position statistics, and the international reserves template (ECB/2007/4). The Guideline and the Recommendation were published in the Official Journal of the EU on 20 June 2007 and are also available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Payment Systems and Market Infrastructure

TARGET2 progress report, 1976kB

Advice on legislation

 CON/2007/15

 CON/2007/16

 CON/2007/17

 CON/2007/18

Statistics

 ECB/2007/3

 ECB/2007/4

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify