Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

January 2007

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on Portuguese legislation on banknotes

On 29 December 2006, at the request of the Portuguese Ministry of Finance and Public Administration, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the establishment of a framework for the detection of counterfeits and the fitness sorting of banknotes (CON/2006/62). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

Corporate Governance / Operational issues

ECB Decision on matters relating to the entry of Banka Slovenije into the Eurosystem

On 30 December 2006 the Governing Council adopted a Decision on Banka Slovenije’s paying-up of capital, transfer of foreign reserve assets and contribution to the European Central Bank’s reserves and provisions (ECB/2006/30). The Decision will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

ECB Agreement on Banka Slovenije’s claim under Article 30.3 of the Statute of the ESCB

On 30 December 2006 the ECB and Banka Slovenije signed an Agreement regarding the claim credited to Banka Slovenije by the ECB under Article 30.3 of the Statute of the ESCB, which is equivalent to Banka Slovenije’s contribution of foreign reserve assets to the ECB. The Agreement will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Advice on legislation

 CON/2006/62

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify