Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

April 2007

Payment Systems and Market Infrastructure

Joint statement on the adoption of the Payment Services Directive

On 20 April 2007 the Governing Council endorsed the publication of a joint statement from the European Commission and the ECB welcoming the European Parliament’s adoption of the Payment Services Directive and urging all stakeholders to work for a smooth and timely implementation of SEPA instruments. This statement was published on 24 April 2007 on the ECB’s website.

TARGET2-Securities: public consultation and governance of the first phase of the project and public consultation for the CCBM2

On 26 April 2007 the Governing Council decided to launch a public consultation on i) the general principles and a set of high level proposals defining the nature and scope of TARGET2-Securities (T2S); and ii) the principles for the development of a common platform for Eurosystem collateral management (CCBM2). A paper on the governance of the operational phase of T2S will be finalised by the second half of 2007. In addition, the Governing Council decided that a note entitled “The organisation of the first phase of the TARGET2-Securities project”, which describes the framework for establishing T2S user requirements would be published. The public consultation was announced and the above-mentioned note published on 26 April 2007 on the ECB’s website. 

 
Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on legislation relating to Community job vacancy statistics

On 13 April 2007, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a regulation on statistics on Community job vacancies (CON/2007/9). The Opinion was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 20 April 2007 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Hungarian anti-money laundering legislation

On 16 April 2007, at the request of the Hungarian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on amendments to the law on the prevention and combating of money laundering relating to the sanctions and supervision regimes and the scope of their application to the national central bank (CON/2007/10). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on European Critical Infrastructure legislation

On 13 April 2007, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the identification and designation of European Critical Infrastructure and the assessment of the need to improve their protection against disruption and destruction (CON/2007/11). The Opinion will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Payment systems

Joint statement on the adoption of the Payment Services Directive

TARGET2-Securities: public consultation

TARGET2-Securities: Organisation of the first project phase

CCBM: public consultation

Advice on legislation

 CON/2007/9

 CON/2007/10

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify