Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

September 2007

Operational issues

Supplementary longer-term refinancing operation

On 6 September 2007 the Governing Council decided to conduct a supplementary liquidity-providing longer-term refinancing operation with a maturity of three months with no preset allotment amount, aimed at supporting the normalisation of the functioning of the euro money market. This decision was announced in a press release issued on the same day. 

Payment systems

Blue Book on Payment and Securities Settlement Systems in the EU (fourth edition)

On 9 August 2007 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the fourth edition of the 
Blue Book on Payment and Securities Settlement Systems in the EU
, a guide to the payment systems in the EU. It takes account of the fundamental changes in payment and securities settlement systems which have taken place between 2001 (when the third edition was produced) and 2007. The Blue Book is available on the ECB’s website.

Financial stability and supervision

EU banking structures

On 20 September 2007 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the “EU banking structures” annual report, prepared by the Banking Supervision Committee. It focuses on structural developments in 2006 and in the first half of 2007 that are relevant from a banking stability viewpoint. The report and a related press release will be published on the ECB’s website by mid-October 2007.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on the regulation of non-banking financial institutions in Romania

On 2 August 2007, at the request of Banca Naţională a României, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the regulation of non-banking financial institutions by the central bank (CON/2007/23). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on statistical reporting requirements in Romania

On 8 August 2007, at the request of Banca Naţională a României, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on statistical reporting of assets and liabilities recorded on the balance sheet of non-banking financial institutions (CON/2007/24). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Spanish legislative preparations for TARGET2

On 23 August 2007, at the request of the Spanish Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on amendments to the legislation on payment and securities settlement systems in preparation for TARGET2 (CON/2007/25). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the Polish deposit protection scheme

On 27 August 2007, at the request of the Polish Minister for Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on amendments relating to the governance, supervision and mode of financing of the deposit protection scheme, in particular as regards the participation of Narodowy Bank Polski (CON/2007/26). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Press release: Supplementary longer-term refinancing operation

Payment systems and market infrastructure

Press release: Publication of the fourth edition of the Blue Book

Advice on legislation

CON/2007/23

CON/2007/24

CON/2007/25

CON/2007/26

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify