Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

March 2007

Monetary policy

Central bank compliance with prohibitions of monetary financing and privileged access

On 22 March 2007, in accordance with the Treaty establishing the European Community, which assigns to the ECB the task of monitoring the compliance of central banks with the prohibitions referred to in Articles 101 and 102 and the related Regulations, the Governing Council approved the report covering the year 2006. Further information on this matter will be provided in a dedicated section of the ECB’s Annual Report 2006 which will be made public on 23 April 2007.

Payment Systems and Market Infrastructure

TARGET2-Securities: next steps

On 8 March 2007 the Governing Council concluded that it is feasible to implement TARGET2-Securities and therefore decided to launch the next phase of the project, namely to specify the governance arrangements of the project and to define the user requirements, based on the implementation of TARGET2-Securities on the TARGET2 platform, with the input of the stakeholders. The TARGET2-Securities blueprint and feasibility study, together with a related press release, were published on the ECB’s website on 8 March 2007.

Financial stability and Supervision 

Private equity in the EU

On 22 March 2007 the Governing Council authorised the publication of a report entitled “Large banks and private equity-sponsored leveraged buyouts in the EU”, prepared by the Banking Supervision Committee. The report assesses the degree of involvement of large EU banks in EU leveraged buyouts and examines the possible financial stability implications of such activities. The report will be published on the ECB’s website by mid-April 2007.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on an amendment to the Deutsche Bundesbank’s statutes

On 7 March 2007, at the request of the German Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on an amendment to the Deutsche Bundesbank’s statutes relating to the number and nomination of the members of its Executive Board (CON/2007/6). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Dutch oversight of clearing and settlement services

On 15 March 2007, at the request of the Dutch Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the oversight of clearing and settlement services (CON/2007/7). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on consumer protection tasks in the Czech Republic

On 21 March 2007, at the request of the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on certain Česká národní banka tasks in the area of consumer protection (CON/2007/8). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

Corporate Governance

ECB’s Annual Accounts 2006

On 8 March 2007 the Governing Council approved the audited Annual Accounts of the ECB for the financial year 2006. The Accounts, together with a related press release, were published on the ECB’s website on 8 March 2007.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Publications

Annual Report

Payments & Markets

T2-Securities

Advice on legislation

 CON/2007/6

 CON/2007/7

 CON/2007/8

Corporate governance

 Audited Annual Accounts for 2006

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify