Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

February 2007

Operational issues 

Euro Money Market Study 2006 

On 1 February 2007 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the Euro Money Market Study 2006. It is based on surveys covering the second quarters of 2005 and 2006 and analyses the euro money market in terms of trends in turnover and developments in its integration and efficiency. The study, together with a press release, was published on 13 February 2007 on the ECB’s website. 

Covered bonds in the Eurosystem collateral framework

On 22 February 2007 the Governing Council decided to treat covered bonds issued from 1 January 2008 in the same way as all other marketable assets within the Eurosystem credit assessment framework by subjecting them to the same rating requirements. Covered bonds issued before 1 January 2008 will continue to be assessed against the previously applied criteria until their maturity.

Financial stability and Supervision 

ECB Report on Financial Integration 2007

On 22 February 2007 the Governing Council exchanged views on the first issue of a new annual ECB publication entitled “ECB Report on Financial Integration 2007” to be published in March 2007. The main purpose of this report is to enhance the contribution of the ECB and the Eurosystem to the Community objective of advancing European financial integration. In addition, it is designed to raise public awareness about the role of the ECB and the Eurosystem in supporting financial integration. While the geographical scope of the report is mainly the euro area, issues will also be addressed from an EU perspective.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on Cypriot preparation for adoption of the euro

On 15 January 2007, at the request of the Cypriot Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the legal framework for adoption of the euro and a smooth changeover (CON/2007/1). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website. 

ECB Opinion on Hungarian statistical reporting legislation

On 25 January 2007, at the request of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the establishment of a direct reporting system for balance of payments statistics (CON/2007/2). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Irish legislation on asset-covered securities

On 14 February 2007, at the request of the Irish Department of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on asset-covered securities (CON/2007/3). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on a new comitology procedure in Community legislation

On 15 February 2007, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the introduction of a new comitology procedure in eight Financial Services Action Plan directives (CON/2007/4). The Opinion will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Slovenian legislation on coins

On 21 February 2007, at the request of the Slovenian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the issuance of commemorative and collector euro coins (CON/2007/5). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

Statistics 

Publication of Short-Term European Paper (STEP) yield statistics 

On 22 February 2007 the Governing Council decided that as from 2 April 2007, daily STEP yield statistics will be published once a week, referring to the transactions settled on each day during the previous week. A related press release has been published on the ECB’s website today.

Corporate Governance

Creation of an ECB Audit Committee 

On 22 February 2007 the Governing Council decided to create an ECB Audit Committee to further strengthen the ECB’s governance framework. 

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

 Euro Money Market Study 2006, pdf, 1.5 MB

 Indexed data for the euro money market survey 2006, zip

Press release

Advice on legislation

 CON/2007/1

 CON/2007/2

 CON/2007/3

 CON/2007/5

Statistics

 Press release on STEP yield statistics

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify