Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

October 2007

Operational issues

ECB Guideline on amendments to the “General Documentation on Eurosystem monetary policy instruments and procedures”

On 20 September 2007 the Governing Council adopted a Guideline amending Annexes I and II to Guideline ECB/2000/7 on monetary policy instruments and procedures of the Eurosystem (ECB/2007/10). The Guideline will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

Acceptance of the rating agency Dominion Bond Rating Service as a new ECAI source within the ECAF

On 19 October 2007 the Governing Council decided to accept the rating agency Dominion Bond Rating Service (DBRS) as a new external credit assessment institution (ECAI) source for the purposes of the Eurosystem credit assessment framework (ECAF – see Section 6.3 of the document entitled “General Documentation on Eurosystem monetary policy instruments and procedures”). The go-live of DBRS eligibility will immediately follow the finalisation of the necessary adaptations in the relevant IT infrastructure. The go-live date will be pre-announced on the ECB’s website, most likely by the beginning of 2008.

Payment systems

Outcome of the initial consultation on the CCBM2 – next generation of collateral management 

On 10 October 2007 the Governing Council decided to publish the outcome of an initial consultation on the principles for the development of a common platform for Eurosystem collateral management, which will be called Collateral Central Bank Management (CCBM2). The document, which is available on the ECB’s website, summarises the main issues emerging from the responses to this initial consultation, which have also been published on the ECB’s website.

Oversight of payment infrastructures: The Eurosystem’s common methodology for the assessment of euro systemically and prominently important payment systems against the Core Principles

On 11 October 2007 the Governing Council took note that no comments had been received on the public consultation on the draft of “The Eurosystem’s common methodology for the assessment of euro systemically and prominently important payment systems against the Core Principles”. It then approved the Eurosystem’s common methodology. The Eurosystem’s common methodology will be made available shortly on the ECB’s website.

Progress report on TARGET2

On 25 October 2007 the Governing Council took decisions, based on a progress report on TARGET2 (the last one before the go-live of TARGET2, foreseen on 19 November 2007), in respect of the remaining outstanding legal, operational and communication issues related to the go-live of TARGET2. The report will be published on the ECB’s website on Monday 29 October 2007.

Progress report on TARGET2-Securities

On 25 October 2007 the Governing Council took note of a TARGET2-Securities (T2S) progress report. The report covers issues related to the outcome of the April 2007 public consultation on the general principles and high-level proposals for the user requirements. The report has been published on the ECB’s website today. 

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on the oversight of payment and securities settlement systems in Romania

On 21 September 2007, at the request of Banca Naţională a României, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on Banca Naţională a României’s oversight of payment systems, securities settlement systems and payment instruments (CON/2007/27). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Polish legislation relating to banknotes and coins

On 25 September 2007, at the request of the President of Narodowy Bank Polski, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on rules for the sorting and packaging of banknotes and coins (CON/2007/28). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the scope of the Banco de Portugal’s prudential supervisory role

On 5 October 2007, at the request of the Portuguese Ministry of Finance and Public Administration, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the establishment of a consumer protection regime within the scope of the Banco de Portugal’s prudential supervisory role (CON/2007/29). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Community legislation relating to the harmonised index of consumer prices

On 5 October 2007, at the request of the European Commission, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on sampling, replacement and quality adjustment relating to the harmonised indices of consumer prices (HICP) (CON/2007/30). The Opinion was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 23 October 2007 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the reform of financial supervision in Poland

On 9 October 2007, at the request of the Polish Minister for Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the reform of financial supervision, in particular as regards Narodowy Bank Polski (CON/2007/31). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the reform of financial supervision in Germany 

On 15 October 2007, at the request of the German Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the modernisation of the supervisory structure of the Federal Financial Supervisory Authority (BaFin) (CON/2007/32). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Guideline ECB/2007/10

Eurosystem credit assessment framework (ECAF)

Payment systems

Outcome of the CCBM2 consultation

About the CCBM2 project

TARGET2 progress report

TARGET2-Securities progress report

Advice on legislation

CON/2007/27

CON/2007/28

CON/2007/29

CON/2007/30

CON/2007/31

CON/2007/32

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify