Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

July 2007

Payment systems

ECB Fifth Progress Report: “SEPA: from concept to reality”

On 19 July 2007 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the Fifth Progress Report on the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). The report highlights areas where greater efforts are needed to make the SEPA project a success and gives guidance about what measures to take. The English version of the report and a press release in all the languages of the euro area countries were published today on the ECB’s website. The other euro area language versions of the report will be published shortly on the websites of the respective Eurosystem central banks.

Policy stance on the outsourcing of the settlement in central bank money

On 19 July 2007 the Governing Council decided to inform Euroclear of the Eurosystem’s stance on the outsourcing of the settlement in central bank money. While the outsourcing of the settlement in central bank money is not foreseen on a permanent basis, the Governing Council will not change its current policy of accepting different models of settling securities in central bank money until TARGET2-Securities goes live. The Governing Council also decided to look favourably on improvements which can be made to TARGET2 in order to facilitate the night-time settlement of securities settlement systems.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on the introduction of the euro in Cyprus and Malta

On 5 July 2007, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the introduction of the euro in Cyprus and Malta, and on the conversion rates to the euro for the Cyprus pound and the Maltese lira (CON/2007/19). The Opinion was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 13 July 2007 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the opening of an Intergovernmental Conference to draw up a Treaty amending the existing Treaties

On 5 July 2007, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the mandate for the Intergovernmental Conference to draw up a Treaty to amend the existing Treaties (CON/2007/20). The Opinion was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 13 July 2007 and is also available on the ECB’s website. 

Corporate Governance

Participation of the central banks of Cyprus and Malta in Governing Council meetings before 1 January 2008

On 5 July 2007 the Governing Council decided to invite the Governors of the central banks of Cyprus and Malta to observe its meetings and to grant observer status to experts from both central banks in all Eurosystem/ESCB committees and their substructures whenever they meet in the Eurosystem composition. This decision entered into immediate effect following the decision of the EU Council of 10 July 2007 to abrogate the derogation status for Cyprus and Malta.

Eurosystem/ESCB committees, the Human Resources Conference (HRC) and the Budget Committee (BUCOM) 

On 5 July 2007 the Governing Council appointed Mr José de Matos (Vice-Governor of the Banco de Portugal) as chairman of BUCOM with immediate effect. On 19 July 2007, as part of the triennial review of committee mandates, the Governing Council confirmed all committee chairpersons for a further three years. 

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Payment Systems

5th SEPA progress report, 1976kB

Advice on legislation

 CON/2007/19

 CON/2007/20

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify