Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

June 2008

Advice on Legislation

ECB Opinion on legislation relating to Community job vacancy statistics

On 23 May 2008, at the request of the Commission of the European Communities, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on implementing the Regulation on statistics on Community job vacancies as regards seasonal adjustment procedures, quality reports, data collection, transmission specifications and feasibility studies (CON/2008/22). The Opinion was published in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 on 31 May 2008 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Slovak legislation relating to dual display and rounding rules

On 30 May 2008, at the request of Národná banka Slovenska, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on draft legislative provisions on dual display in the banking, capital market, insurance industry and pension saving sectors and on rounding rules for certain types of securities (CON/2008/23). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on a derogation from certain provisions of Greek company law 

On 4 June 2008, at the request of the Bank of Greece, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a derogation from the company law with regard to certain transactions by credit institutions (CON/2008/24). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Slovak legislation relating to dual display in the gambling sector

On 12 June 2008, at the request of the Slovak Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on dual display of amounts in the gambling sector (CON/2008/25). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Polish legislation on the exchange of banknotes and coins 

On 16 June 2008, at the request of Narodowy Bank Polski, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the rules for exchanging banknotes and coins (CON/2008/26). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

 International and European Cooperation

The seventh “Review of the international role of the euro” 

On 19 June 2008 the Governing Council approved the publication of the seventh “Review of the international role of the euro” on the ECB’s website on 9 July 2008. The Review, which covers developments in 2007, examines the role of the euro in global markets and countries outside the euro area, and aims to enhance understanding of the current state of internationalisation of the euro, identifying the main developments and underlying trends. 

Corporate Governance 

Organisation of Governing Council meetings

On 5 June 2008 the Governing Council decided that whenever a Governing Council meeting is scheduled for the same day as a meeting of the General Council, the Governing Council meeting will start at 5 p.m. on the previous day (Wednesday) and will resume on the Thursday afternoon following the General Council meeting. The schedules of the Governing Council and General Council meetings available on the Eurosystem’s websites have been updated accordingly. See http://www.ecb.europa.eu/press/calendars/mgcgc/html/index.en.html.

Banknotes

ECB Guideline on frontloading and sub-frontloading of euro banknotes and coins

On 19 June 2008 the Governing Council adopted a Guideline amending Guideline ECB/2006/9 on certain preparations for the euro cash changeover and on frontloading and sub-frontloading of euro banknotes and coins outside the euro area (ECB/2008/4). The Guideline will be published shortly in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 and on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Advice on legislation

CON/2008/22

CON/2008/23

CON/2008/24

CON/2008/25

CON/2008/26

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify