Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

May 2008

Operational Issues

Expansion of US dollar liquidity-providing operations 

On 24 April 2008 the Governing Council decided, in conjunction with the Federal Reserve System and in the context of the Term Auction Facility, to increase the amount of US dollar liquidity provided to the counterparties of the Eurosystem to USD 25 billion in each bi-weekly auction. A press release on the joint action announced by the ECB, the Federal Reserve System and the Swiss National Bank to expand their liquidity measures was published on the ECB’s website on 2 May 2008. 

Indicative calendars for Eurosystem tender operations and reserve maintenance periods

On 13 May 2008 the Governing Council approved the indicative calendars for Eurosystem tender operations and reserve maintenance periods in 2009. Details are provided in two press releases, which were published on the ECB’s website today.

Payment Systems

The ECB’s response to a public consultation by the UK authorities on payment systems oversight

On 29 April 2008 the Governing Council approved the ECB’s response to a public consultation reviewing arrangements relating to financial stability and depositor protection in the United Kingdom. The Governing Council welcomed a proposal to formalise the legal basis for the Bank of England’s role in payment systems oversight but expressed its concerns regarding a proposal to limit the Bank of England’s responsibility to the oversight of large-value payment systems only and cautioned against granting oversight responsibilities to an entity other than a central bank.

Migration to TARGET2 

On 8 May 2008 the Governing Council took note of the planned migration to TARGET2 of the third and last migration group (composed of Denmark, Estonia, Greece, Italy, Poland and the ECB), scheduled for 19 May 2008, upon acknowledgement of successful completion of the tests. A related press release informing the participants was published on the ECB’s website on 9 May 2008. On 19 May 2008 the successful migration of this third and last group was confirmed in a press release on the ECB’s website.

Payment Systems and Market Infrastructure

Release of TARGET2-Securities (T2S) documentation to central securities depositories (CSDs)

On 21 May 2008 the Governing Council decided, before taking its final decision on whether to proceed with the T2S project in summer 2008, to assess the level of support among CSDs, their willingness to enter into a contractual arrangement with the Eurosystem and whether they would join the project once it were in operation. To that end, the Governing Council authorised the circulation on 23 May 2008 of documentation related to T2S. CSDs have until 4 July 2008 to respond. A related press release was published today on the ECB’s website.

Financial Stability and Supervision 

ECB Financial Stability Review June 2008

On 21 May 2008 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the “Financial Stability Review – June 2008”. The review provides a comprehensive assessment of the ability of the euro area’s financial system to absorb adverse disturbances and examines the main sources of risks to, and vulnerability of, the stability of the euro area’s financial system. This edition of the review will be published on the ECB’s website on 9 June 2008.

Advice on Legislation

ECB Opinion on Slovak legislation relating to payment systems and to certain laws 

On 25 April 2008, at the request of Národná banka Slovenska, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the legislative regime regarding payment systems to ensure its compatibility with the Treaty and to facilitate a smooth migration of the domestic payment system to TARGET2 (CON/2008/18). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the introduction of the EU regulatory procedure with scrutiny regarding some statistical instruments

On 5 May 2008, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the introduction of the regulatory procedure with scrutiny regarding some statistical instruments (CON/2008/19). The Opinion was published in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 on 14 May 2008 and is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Polish legislation relating to trading in financial instruments and capital market regulation

On 21 May 2008, at the request of the Polish Minister for Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on Narodowy Bank Polski’s role regarding securities clearing and settlement systems and the central securities depository system (CON/2008/20). The Opinion will be published shortly on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on a draft law on Česká národní banka 

On 21 May 2008, at the request of Česká národní banka, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a draft law on Česká národní banka (CON/2008/21). The Opinion will be published shortly on the ECB’s website. 

Corporate Governance 

ECB Recommendation on the external auditors of the ECB

On 30 April 2008 the Governing Council adopted a Recommendation to the EU Council on the external auditors of the ECB (ECB/2008/2). The Recommendation was published in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 on 9 May 2008 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

Banknotes

ECB Decision on security accreditation procedures for manufacturers of euro secure items 

On 15 May 2008 the Governing Council adopted a Decision on security accreditation procedures for manufacturers of euro secure items for euro banknotes (ECB/2008/3). The Decision will be published shortly in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 and on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Press release of 2 May 2008

Indicative calendar Eurosystem tender operations 2009

Indicative calendar Eurosystem reserve maintenance periods 2009

Payment systems

Migration to TARGET2

Payment systems and market infrastructure

Release of T2S documentation to CSDs

Advice on legislation

CON/2008/18

CON/2008/19

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify