Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

January 2008

Operational issues

US dollar liquidity providing operations

On 10 January 2008 the Governing Council of the ECB decided, in conjunction with the Federal Reserve System and in the context of the Term Auction Facility (TAF), to further offer US dollar liquidity in January, in order to contribute again to satisfying the exceptional needs for dollar funding and to facilitate the further normalisation of conditions in the money market. A press release was published on the ECB’s website on 10 January 2008. 

Payment Systems and Market Infrastructure

Oversight framework for card payment schemes – standards

On 4 January 2008 the Governing Council of the ECB approved a report entitled “Oversight framework for card payment schemes – standards”, which lays down Eurosystem oversight standards for card payment schemes operating in the euro area. The aim of these standards is to ensure that the card payment schemes are secure and efficient. The report, together with the comments received during the public consultation on a previous version of the report, has been published on the ECB’s website today.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on the control of reproduction of euro banknotes in Cyprus 

On 4 January 2008, at the request of the Cypriot Ministry of Commerce, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the control of reproduction of euro banknotes and coins in Cyprus (CON/2008/1). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the distribution of powers between Česká národní banka and the Czech Ministry of Finance 

On 7 January 2008, at the request of the Czech Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the distribution of powers between Česká národní banka and the Ministry of Finance to prepare and submit certain draft laws to the Government (CON/2008/2). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on German legislation on coins

On 9 January 2008, at the request of the German Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on German legislation on coins (CON/2008/3). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

Corporate Governance 

ECB Decision on matters relating to the entry of the Central Bank of Cyprus and the Central Bank of Malta into the Eurosystem

On 31 December 2007 the Governing Council adopted a Decision on the paying-up of capital, transfer of foreign reserve assets and contributions by the Central Bank of Cyprus and the Central Bank of Malta to the European Central Bank’s reserves and provisions (ECB/2007/22). The Decision will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

ECB Agreement on the Central Bank of Cyprus’ claim under Article 30.3 of the ESCB Statute

On 31 December 2007 the ECB and the Central Bank of Cyprus signed an Agreement regarding the claim credited to the Central Bank of Cyprus by the ECB under Article 30.3 of the ESCB Statute. The Agreement will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

ECB Agreement on the Central Bank of Malta’s claim under Article 30.3 of the ESCB Statute

On 31 December 2007 the ECB and the Central Bank of Malta signed an Agreement regarding the claim credited to the Central Bank of Malta by the ECB under Article 30.3 of the ESCB Statute. The Agreement will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Payment systems

 Standards for an oversight framework for card payment systems, 900 kB

 Summary of comments received in the public consultation, 29 kB

 Press release

 Public consultation

Advice on legislation

CON/2008/1

CON/2008/2

CON/2008/3

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify