Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Reflections on monetary policy in the euro area

Speaking points by Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, Eurofi conference, Sofia, 27 April 2018

While the recent flow of data points towards some moderation in the on-going economic expansion, growth is still expected to remain solid and broad based.

Monetary policy measures introduced since 2014 have been instrumental in supporting euro area growth and employment.

Underlying inflation continues to be subdued and have yet to show convincing signs of a sustained upward trend. At the same time, wages continue to edge higher and should contribute to price pressures.

Overall, the underlying strength in the euro area economy continues to support our confidence that inflation will converge towards our aim over the medium term. Yet, inflation convergence will likely proceed only gradually, and remains contingent on a highly accommodative monetary policy stance.

Looking ahead, the evolution of monetary policy will be firmly guided by the outlook for price stability. The transition towards policy normalisation will begin once the Governing Council assesses there has been sustained adjustment in the path of inflation.

This assessment will be based on three criteria: convergence, confidence, and resilience
   

Convergence:
 looking into the medium term, headline inflation should be well on track toward reaching levels below, but close to, 2%

Confidence:
 Governing Council will need to have confidence that the convergence path is likely to materialise sustainably

Resilience:
 sustained adjustment in the path of inflation will be maintained even without additional net asset purchases

There is growing confidence that these criteria will be attained, yet patience, persistence and prudence are necessary:
   

Patience:
 as it takes time for underlying price pressures to build up 

Persistence:
 the pick-up in inflation still needs support from the monetary policy stance

Prudence:
 global and domestic uncertainties counsel prudence in the adjustment of the monetary policy parameters

Once the Governing Council decides that sustained adjustment is taking place, net asset purchases will end in line with our forward guidance.

Thereafter, monetary support for inflation convergence will be provided by 
   

Reinvestments continuing for an extended period of time

Policy rates remaining at present levels well past the end of our net asset purchases

The path of policy normalisation will remain conditional on the outlook for price stability. 

 

Related topics

Monetary policy

Euro area

Policies

Disclaimer
 

			  Please note that related topic tags are currently available for selected content only.
 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify