Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

May 2006

Payment systems

Joint Commission/ECB statement on SEPA

On 4 May 2006 the Governing Council endorsed the publication of a Joint Statement from the European Commission and the ECB on the Single Euro Payments Area (SEPA). This statement was published on the same day on the ECB’s website.

Financial stability and supervision

Financial Stability Review - June 2006 

On 18 May 2006 the Governing Council approved the June 2006 issue of the euro area’s Financial Stability Review, which will be published on the ECB’s website on 1 June 2006. The Review provides a comprehensive assessment of the ability of the euro area’s financial system to absorb adverse disturbances and examines the main sources of risks to, and vulnerabilities of, the stability of the euro area’s financial system.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on Dutch financial sector supervision

On 25 April 2006, on its own initiative, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on financial sector supervision in the Netherlands (CON/2006/20). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Community payment services legislation

On 26 April 2006, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on payment services in the internal market (CON/2006/21). The Opinion was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 9 May 2006 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Portuguese legislation relating to coins

On 28 April 2006, at the request of the Portuguese Ministry of Finance and Public Administration, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the codification of various laws on the issue, minting, putting into circulation and marketing of coins (CON/2006/22). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Press releases

 Single Euro Payments Area [en]

Advice on legislation

 CON/2006/20

 CON/2006/21

 CON/2006/22

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify