Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

October 2006

Operational issues

Assessment of securities settlement systems against user standards for Eurosystem credit operations

On 19 October 2006 the Governing Council updated the assessment of securities settlement systems eligible for the settlement of Eurosystem credit operations against the standards published in 1998. A press release has been published on the ECB’s website today

Assessment of the Slovenian securities settlement system

In the context of Slovenia’s entry to Economic and Monetary Union on 1 January 2007, the Governing Council, on 19 October 2006, assessed the eligibility of the Slovenian securities settlement system for its use in Eurosystem credit operations. A press release has been published on the ECB’s website today.

Payment Systems and market infrastructure

TARGET2 securities – publication of replies to questionnaire on initial assumptions and questions 

On 28 September 2006 the Governing Council decided to publish the replies received from financial market participants in response to the questionnaire “TARGET2 Securities: Initial Assumptions and Questions” – to the extent authorised by the respondents – on the ECB’s website. A press release on the follow-up work has been published on the ECB’s website today.

Financial Stability and Supervision

EU banking structures

On 19 October 2006 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the annual report on “EU banking structures”, which focuses on the structural developments in 2005 and in the first half of 2006 that could potentially affect banking stability. The report will be published together with a press release on the ECB’s website on 25 October 2006.

Eurosystem stress testing exercise 

On 19 October 2006 the Governing Council discussed the findings of a simulation exercise, conducted at the level of the Eurosystem in May 2006, to test Eurosystem procedures for financial crisis management. 

Supervisory structures in EU and acceding countries 

On 19 October 2006 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the note entitled “Recent developments in supervisory structures in EU and acceding countries”, covering the 25 EU Member States and the two acceding countries Bulgaria and Romania. The note will be published on the ECB’s website on 23 October 2006.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on Slovenian banking law

On 19 September 2006, at the request of the Slovenian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a general revision of the banking law (CON/2006/48). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

Statistics

Harmonised competitiveness indicators for euro area countries 

On 2 October 2006 the Governing Council approved the regular monthly publication of the harmonised competitiveness indicators for the euro area countries as a specific domain of the Eurosystem joint dissemination framework. The first publication of these indicators on the ECB’s website is scheduled for December 2006.

Banknotes

ECB Recommendation on anti-counterfeiting measures

On 6 October 2006 the Governing Council adopted a Recommendation on the adoption of certain measures to protect euro banknotes more effectively against counterfeiting (ECB/2006/13). The Recommendation will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

Corporate governance

ECB Recommendation on the external auditors of Banka Slovenije

On 9 October 2006 the Governing Council adopted a Recommendation to the EU Council on the external auditors of Banka Slovenije (ECB/2006/14). The Recommendation will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Press release: Assessment of SSSs against user standards for Eurosystem credit operations (English only)

Press release: Assessment of the Slovenian securities settlement system (English only)

Payment systems and market infrastructure

T2 securities

Press release: Follow-up on questionnaire (English only)

Advice on legislation

 CON/2006/48

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify