Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

September 2006

Economic situation & statistics

Differences in MFI interest rates across euro area countries 

On 31 August 2006 the Governing Council approved the “Report on differences in MFI interest rates across euro area countries”, which will be published together with a press release on the ECB’s website on 20 September 2006. 

Operational issues

Review of the ECB “General Documentation” 

On 31 August 2006 the Governing Council approved a revised version of the document entitled “The implementation of monetary policy in the euro area: General documentation on Eurosystem monetary policy instruments and procedures” (referred to as the “General Documentation”) and adopted Guideline ECB/2006/12 amending Guideline ECB/2000/7. Guideline ECB/2006/12 will replace the current version of the General Documentation when it enters into force on 1 January 2007. The General Documentation will be published later this year in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

STEP as a non-regulated market acceptable for collateral management purposes

On 14 September 2006 the Governing Council decided that the Short-Term European Paper (STEP) market will be accepted as a non-regulated market for collateral purposes in Eurosystem credit operations as soon as the STEP statistics on yields are published on the ECB’s website. A related press release has been published on the ECB’s website today.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on consumer protection tasks in the Czech Republic

On 13 September 2006, at the request of the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on certain Česká národní banka tasks in the area of consumer protection (CON/2006/47). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Economic situation & statistics

Differences in MFI interest rates across euro area countries (out 20 Sept.)

Operational issues

General documentation on Eurosystem monetary policy instruments and procedures

STEP press release (English only)

Advice on legislation

 CON/2006/47

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify