Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

Operational issues

The Short-Term European Paper initiative

On 6 April 2006 the Governing Council approved the provision of technical assistance to the Short-Term European Paper (STEP) Secretariat in relation to the management of the STEP label (which is intended to promote convergence of standards in the fragmented European short-term securities market). The ECB will also compile and publish statistics on yields and volumes.

ECB Guideline on Eurosystem reserve management services

On 7 April 2006 the Governing Council adopted a Guideline on the Eurosystem’s provision of reserve management services in euro to central banks and countries located outside the euro area and to international organisations (ECB/2006/4). The Guideline was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 20 April 2006 and it will be shortly available on the ECB’s website.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on Community statistical classification legislation

On 24 March 2006, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a major revision of the common statistical classification of economic activities within the Community (NACE) (CON/2006/18). The Opinion was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 1 April 2006 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on amendments to Latvijas Banka’s statutes

On 3 April 2006, at the request of Latvijas Banka, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on amendments to Latvijas Banka’s statutes (CON/2006/19). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

Statistics

ECB Guideline on the ECB’s statistical reporting requirements in the field of quarterly financial accounts

On 20 April 2006 the Governing Council adopted a small amendment to Guideline ECB/2002/7 on the statistical reporting requirements of the European Central Bank in the field of quarterly financial accounts (ECB/2006/6). This amending Guideline supplements Guideline ECB/2005/13 of 17 November 2005, which also amended Guideline ECB/2002/7. The Guideline will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

Banknotes

Establishment of a pilot Extended Custodial Inventory programme for euro banknotes

On 6 April 2006 the Governing Council decided that a pilot Extended Custodial Inventory (ECI) programme, intended to facilitate the international distribution of euro banknotes and to improve their circulation outside the euro area, will be established in Asia for one year. The programme will be operational by the end of 2006. 

Corporate Governance

ECB Recommendation on the external auditors of the Banque de France

On 13 April 2006 the Governing Council adopted a Recommendation to the EU Council on the external auditors of the Banque de France (ECB/2006/5). The Recommendation will be published shortly in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Advice on legislation

 CON/2006/18

 CON/2006/19

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify