Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

ARTICLE

Priorities for improving the EU crisis management framework 

Article by Edouard Fernandez-Bollo, Member of the Supervisory Board of the ECB, for Eurofi Magazine

24 February 2022

Now is the time to take very concrete steps to increase the resilience of the European crisis management framework.

Both the industry and the public sector agree that there is a need to improve the crisis management framework in its different dimensions: supervision, resolution and insolvency. However, the persistence of divergent views about the way forward for the banking union has so far prevented breakthroughs in this area. The banking package currently under discussion by the co-legislators already includes a most welcome proposal that would allow the supervisor to withdraw the banking license where a bank has been declared failing or likely to fail but does not pass the public interest test for resolution, ensuring that such banks exit the market. We at the ECB strongly support this proposal, but it alone will not be sufficient to ensure that such badly needed market exits will be orderly, without economic disruptions or indirect forms of bailout by public authorities. Therefore, the ECB remains convinced that additional changes to this framework are needed to enhance the consistency of treatment, in particular of small- to medium-sized banks, and thus to make the EU banking sector more competitive and resilient. Currently, when they do not pass the public interest test applied by the relevant resolution authority, these banks are treated exclusively under national law, and we have seen how different the outcomes can be.

Concrete steps to enhance this framework should prioritise ensuring EU-wide convergence. This would guarantee that, regardless of the differences in national insolvency regimes, the most efficient resolution and wind-down tools are available in all countries – including administrative powers to transfer the assets and liabilities of a failed bank, and the use of a bridge bank to avoid asset liquidation at fire-sale prices. This will help to limit the cost of a bank exit and, as such, is in the interest of all stakeholders: public authorities, the industry and the creditors of the failed bank. But, of course, the use of these resolution and liquidation tools also requires funding. To this end, we need greater European harmonisation of the rules on participation in this funding, including also the rules on burden sharing to absorb potential residual losses.

Within resolution, the first key issue is exploring the scope for a more consistent and wider application of the public interest test by resolution authorities, which is the necessary precondition for accessing the tools and funding provided by the current framework. For orderly wind-down outside of resolution, the problem is more acute, given in particular the present differences in the role and tasks of the national deposit guarantee schemes (DGS). Clearly, a broader use of DGS resources in liquidation and resolution would facilitate the application of transfer tools. To achieve this, the ability of the deposit guarantee schemes to support “alternative” measures to depositor payout should be extended and harmonised. This in turn requires further harmonisation of the least-cost test that is the necessary precondition for DGS interventions. Harmonising the ranking of depositors may facilitate these kinds of intervention and deserves some further reflection. 

Furthermore, within the banking union, we find it necessary that this ability to fund alternative measures should benefit from support from the whole of the banking union. This should be the case as soon as possible, within a first transitional re-insurance European deposit insurance scheme mechanism already, as a firm step towards completing the banking union, and not only at the end of the process. In our view, this requires centralised management and steering by a European authority – the Single Resolution Board being the most obvious candidate – to ensure the necessary convergence and a level playing field for mobilising this form of European support from the beginning. Advances in harmonisation should be thus accompanied by concrete progress towards completing the banking union and the capital markets union. Even if a decisive political breakthrough on the banking union is not reached in the months ahead, it would nonetheless be crucial to undertake further reforms on the crisis management front and push for greater European harmonisation. We need to send a strong signal mobilising the entire Single Market to finance the recovery as well as the green and digital transformation of the European economy. We should not miss this opportunity to reinforce European financial leverage to secure the best possible path out of the crisis.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify