Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

May 2017

Financial stability and supervision

Financial Stability Review May 2017

On 17 May 2017 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the “Financial Stability Review – May 2017”, which reviews the main sources of risk and vulnerability for the stability of the euro area financial system and provides a comprehensive analysis of the capacity of the euro area financial system to absorb shocks. It is due to be published on the ECB’s website on 24 May 2017.

Market infrastructure and payments

Comprehensive assessment of systemically important payment systems (SIPS) and oversight of pan-European instant payment scheme and infrastructure solution

On 5 May 2017 the Governing Council approved the comprehensive assessments of TARGET2, EURO1 and STEP2-T and took note of the comprehensive assessment of CORE(FR) performed by the Banque de France. These four payment systems are classified as systemically important payment systems (SIPS) and are assessed against Regulation ECB/2014/28 on oversight requirements for systemically important payment systems. A report summarising the outcome of these assessments is scheduled to be published on the ECB’s website this summer. The Governing Council furthermore decided to assign lead oversight of the European Payment Council’s SEPA Instant Credit Transfer (SCT Inst) scheme and EBA CLEARING’s instant payment infrastructure solution to the ECB. 

Advice on legislation

ECB opinion on judicial relief granted to holders of qualified bank credit in Slovenia

On 12 May 2017 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2017/16 at the request of the Slovenian Ministry of Finance.

Corporate governance

Eurosystem Procurement Coordination Office (EPCO) 2016 annual report and 2017 procurement plan

On 5 May 2017 the Governing Council took note of the 2016 EPCO annual report and approved an updated 2017 EPCO procurement plan. According to the report, the estimated net financial benefits for the Eurosystem as a result of the contracts in place increased by almost 30 % from the previous year.

Banking supervision

ECB guidance to banks on leveraged transactions 

On 5 May 2017 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish ECB guidance to banks on leveraged transactions. The ECB Guidance on leveraged transactions, together with the feedback statement summarising the comments received during the related public consultation and an accompanying press release, are available on the ECB banking supervision website.

ECB Guide to fit and proper assessments

On 11 May 2017 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish the ECB Guide to fit and proper assessments. The objective of this Guide is to explain in greater detail the policies, practices and processes applied by the ECB when assessing the suitability of members of the management bodies of significant credit institutions. The ECB Guide to fit and proper assessments, together with the feedback statement summarising the comments received during the related public consultation, are available on the ECB banking supervision website.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Market infrastructure and payments

Payment systems

ECB/2014/28

Advice on legislation

CON/2017/16

Banking supervision

Public consultations

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify