Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Signing of the Headquarters agreement

Welcome speech by Willem F. Duisenberg

Sehr geehrte Herren Bundesminister,

Sehr geehrte Herr Ministerpräsident,

Sehr geehrte Herr Staatsminister,

Sehr verehrte Frau Oberbürgermeisterin,

Meine sehr geehrten Damen und Herren, liebe Kollegen und Mitarbeiter,

Sehr geehrte Herren Minister

It is a great honour and a pleasure to welcome you, today, to the signing of the Headquarters Agreement between the European Central Bank (the "ECB") and the Government of the Federal Republic of Germany. The signing of this Agreement represents the completion of one more step forward in the preparation of the forthcoming commencement of the third stage of Economic and Monetary Union.

The Agreement that you, Dr. Kinkel and Dr. Waigel, on behalf of the Federal Government, and I, on behalf of the ECB, are about to sign, essentially includes provisions for the application of the Protocol on the privileges and immunities of the European Communities. In particular it governs technical aspects relating to the status of the ECB as an institution of the European Community and of its staff on German territory and the relationship between the ECB and the German authorities. In contrast to the ECB’s predecessor, the European Monetary Institute, the ECB will conduct banking operations as from the start of Stage Three. Accordingly, legal precautions were called for, to ensure that this will be possible without limitations in the context of the fulfilment by the ECB of its duties. The Federal Government thereby fully recognises the supranational character of the ECB in its field of activity.

I should like to thank the Federal Government for the speed with which it has handled the negotiations, thus enabling the Agreement to be signed today and the ratification procedure to be initiated straight afterwards. We are assuming that the legislative process will have been concluded by the end of 1998 and that it will be possible for the Agreement to come into force in time for the start of Stage Three of Economic and Monetary Union. 

I should now like to invite you to sign the Agreement.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify