Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Frank Elderson
Member of the ECB's Executive Board

SPEECH
Transcript of video recording for Finance and Biodiversity Day of 16th United Nations Conference on Biological Diversity (COP16) 
Contribution by Frank Elderson, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the European Central Bank (ECB), 16th meeting of the Conference of the Parties to the Convention on Biological Diversity – Finance and Biodiversity Day
Cali, 28 October 2024
The global economy and finance need nature to survive. Analysis by the ECB shows that the economy depends critically on nature: 72% of non-financial businesses in the euro area – around 4.2 million individual companies – would experience significant problems as a result of ecosystem degradation. These businesses rely on ecosystem services like fertile soils, timber and clean water. And 75% of bank loans are tied to these businesses. So, if they run into trouble, the banks that finance them will too. This interdependence underscores why the ECB made nature one of the focus areas of its climate and nature plan for 2024 and 2025. It is also why we push banks under our supervision to manage all material nature-related risks.
The ECB does not stand alone in recognising this threat. The value of nature for the economy is acknowledged by the global Network of Central Banks and Supervisors for Greening the Financial System, which has 141 members worldwide. Additionally, a recent stocktake by the Financial Stability Board showed that a growing number of policy authorities around the world are considering the potential implications of nature-related risks for financial stability.
In recognition of the vital importance of nature for the economy, international fora must ensure that nature considerations are fully integrated into regulation and supervision, alongside ongoing efforts to account for climate-related considerations. This starts with identifying exposures and vulnerabilities to nature-related risks.
While central banks and supervisors are not nature policymakers, we must take nature into account to fulfil our mandate of price stability and safe and sound banks. Otherwise, we risk failing to deliver on our mandate.
My message on this Finance and Biodiversity Day is clear: if you destroy nature, you destroy the economy. The right conditions must be established for nature – and consequently the economy – to thrive. The economy needs nature to survive. Financial stability needs nature to survive. To deliver on our mandate, we need nature to survive. And the survival of nature requires financing. Therefore, your success here in Cali is vitally important.
Thank you. Buena suerte.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify