Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

January 2019

Market infrastructure and payments

Decision on the selection of Eurosystem Single Market Infrastructure Gateway service providers

On 23 January 2019 the Governing Council adopted Decision ECB/2019/2 on the selection of Eurosystem Single Market Infrastructure Gateway (ESMIG) network service providers. This legal act sets out the selection and awarding conditions for granting a concession. It also mandates the Banca d’Italia to conduct the procedure on behalf of the Eurosystem. The Decision is available on the ECB’s website.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on the organisation of the functioning of the central register of bank accounts and financial transactions in Belgium 

On 14 December 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/57 at the request of the Belgian Ministry of Finance.

ECB Opinion on macroprudential tools in Spain 

On 21 December 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/58 at the request of the Banco de España, on behalf of the Spanish State Secretary for Economy and Business Support.

ECB Opinion on the legal framework for covered bonds in Estonia

On 3 January 2019 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2019/1 at the request of the Estonian Ministry of Finance.

ECB Opinion on the Central Bank of Malta’s supervision of credit reference agencies and its oversight of payment services in Malta

On 21 January 2019 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2019/2 at the request of the Central Bank of Malta.

Corporate governance

Multilateral agreement on the information exchange between the ECB and the anti-money laundering authorities of the EEA Member States 

On 9 January 2019 the Governing Council approved the entry of the ECB into a multilateral agreement on the practical modalities for the exchange of information between the ECB and the competent anti-money laundering and combating the financing of terrorism (AML/CFT) authorities of EEA Member States. The agreement was signed by the ECB on 10 January 2019 and will be published on the ECB’s website.

Single Code of Conduct for high-level officials

The single Code of Conduct for all ECB decision-makers and high-level officials, which was endorsed by the Governing Council in December 2018, entered into force on 1 January 2019. The new code takes into account the ECB’s specificities as a central bank, a banking supervisor and an EU institution. It is the latest measure undertaken by the ECB to further strengthen and refine its good governance and integrity frameworks and responds to requests from the European Parliament and recommendations of the European Ombudsman. The previous Codes of Conduct for the members of the Governing Council, the Executive Board and the Supervisory Board have been repealed. The Code of Conduct for high-level ECB Officials was published on the ECB’s website on 16 January 2019.

Banking supervision

Appointment of temporary administrators

On 1 January 2019 the Governing Council did not object to the proposal by the Supervisory Board to appoint three temporary administrators and a three-member surveillance committee to take charge of Banca Carige and replace its Board of Directors.

Guide to assessment of licence applications

On 3 January 2019 the Governing Council did not object to the proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish a consolidated Guide to assessments of licence applications. The Guide is available on the ECB’s banking supervision website. 

Recommendation of the European Central Bank on dividend distribution policies

On 7 January 2019 the Governing Council did not object to the proposal by the Supervisory Board to adopt Recommendation ECB/2019/1 on dividend distribution policies. The Recommendation is available on the ECB’s banking supervision website.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Market infrastructure and payments

ECB/2019/2

Advice on legislation

CON/2018/57

CON/2018/58

CON/2019/01

CON/2019/02

Corporate governance

Code of Conduct for high-level ECB Officials

Banking supervision

ECB appoints temporary administrators for Banca Carige

ECB publishes consolidated Guide to assessments of licence applications

ECB/2019/1

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify