Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

November 2019

15 November 2019

Market operations

Quinquennial review of the Agreement on Net Financial Assets

On 25 October 2019 the Governing Council approved a revised Agreement on Net Financial Assets (ANFA). ANFA is an agreement between the national central banks (NCBs) of the euro area and the ECB that sets rules and limits for non-monetary policy holdings related to the national tasks of the NCBs. ANFA is reviewed at least every five years. This year’s revisions are mainly limited to ensuring the consistency of the agreement with the monetary policy environment of excess liquidity for the foreseeable future and to introducing necessary operational refinements. The revised ANFA is available on the ECB’s website.

Financial stability and supervision

Financial Stability Review November 2019

On 13 November 2019 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the “Financial Stability Review – November 2019”, which reviews the main sources of risk and vulnerability for the stability of the euro area financial system and provides a comprehensive analysis of the capacity of the euro area financial system to absorb shocks. This issue contains two special feature articles. The first one is dedicated to euro area bank profitability and consolidation, the second assesses the systemic footprint of euro area banks. The Financial Stability Review will be published on the ECB’s website on 20 November 2019.

Market infrastructure and payments

Updated information security policies for TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities

On 31 October 2019 the Governing Council approved updated information security policy documentation for TARGET2 and TARGET2-Securities (T2S) which is aligned with the 2013 version (update) of the ISO 27002 standard used as a basis for the TARGET2 and T2S security requirements and controls. Accordingly amended annexes to the relevant legal documentation, namely the T2S Framework Agreement and the Currency Participation Agreement, will be made available on the ECB’s website once the non-objection procedure with the central securities depositories for minor changes of a technical or operational nature to the T2S legal documentation has been completed successfully.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on amendments to the Law on Latvijas Banka

On 25 October 2019 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2019/36 at the request of the Budžeta un finanšu (nodokļu) komisija (Budget and Finance (Tax) Commission) of the Saeima (Parliament) of the Republic of Latvia.

ECB Opinion on a proposal for a regulation on a governance framework for the budgetary instrument for convergence and competitiveness for the euro area

On 30 October 2019 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2019/37 at the request of the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament.

ECB Opinion on the security of network and information systems in Spain

On 11 November 2019 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2019/38 at the request of the Banco de España, on behalf of the 
Secretaría de Estado para el Avance Digital
 (SEAD, the Spanish State Secretary for Digital Progress).

Statistics 

Report on the confidentiality of the individual statistical information collected by the European System of Central Banks

On 7 November 2019 the Governing Council took note of the report, covering the first semester of 2018, on the confidentiality of the individual statistical information collected by the ECB, assisted by the NCBs, and approved the publication of its summary. This annual report is prepared in accordance with the provisions of Council Regulation (EC) No 2533/98 concerning the collection of statistical information by the European Central Bank that provide for the publication of a report on the measures adopted to safeguard the confidentiality of the statistical information collected by the European System of Central Banks. The summary report, which concludes that no incident occurred in the period under review, is available on the ECB’s website and on the websites of the NCBs that have also chosen to publish it.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Market operations

Agreement on Net Financial Assets (ANFA)

Advice on legislation

CON/2019/36

CON/2019/37

CON/2019/38

Statistics

Summary report

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify