Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Central clearing: reaping the benefits, controlling the risks

Article by Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, and Chairman of the Committee on Payments and Market Infrastructures (Bank for International Settlements), published in the Banque de France Financial Stability Review, 20 April 2017

Summary

As a result of structural changes in financial markets and the introduction of mandatory central clearing obligations for standardised over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives, central clearing has expanded significantly in recent years. In parallel, public authorities have devoted greater attention to strengthening the global safeguards for central clearing, notably with the adoption of the CPMI-IOSCO Principles for Financial Market Infrastructures in 2012, a complementary CPMI-IOSCO report on recovery of financial market infrastructures in 2014, and dedicated Financial Stability Board guidance on how to apply the “Key Attributes of Effective Resolution Regimes for Financial Institutions” to financial market infrastructures in 2014. In 2015 global standard-setting bodies launched a comprehensive work plan on central counterparty (CCP) resilience, recovery, resolution and clearing interdependencies to further enhance this framework. 

This article takes stock of the latest achievements in this area and outlines future priorities, concerning the finalisation of the CCP work plan, interactions between requirements for central counterparties and those for banks, greater granularity of central counterparty supervision and oversight, cross-border cooperation between authorities as well as macroprudential safeguards for central clearing.

The article is available from this page or directly from the 
website of the Banque de France
.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Article

Central clearing: reaping the benefits, controlling the risks

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify