Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

European banks – The quest for the best business model

Speech by Sabine Lautenschläger, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB and Vice-Chair of the Supervisory Board of the ECB, ECB Forum on Banking Supervision, Frankfurt, 7 November 2017

The banking sector is going through tough times. Having emerged from a major crisis, it faces challenges and change. But one thing has not changed, and it never will. A bank needs a sustainable business model. It has to earn revenues; it has to keep its costs in check; and it has to keep its risks under control. How all this is done has changed, however. Many things that still worked a couple of years ago no longer work today.

Let me quickly highlight a few points.

Profitability is low for many banks.

First, for a long time, economic growth was low. Together with low interest rates, that has put a brake on a traditional source of revenue. Banks, in particular those that have not found a profitable market niche, need to diversify their sources of revenue. Digitalisation might offer a solution, but it is certainly not the only one.

Second, some national banking markets in Europe are overbanked and therefore overly competitive. So there is a need for consolidation – consolidation which leads to stronger banks with viable business models.

Third, many banks still have high costs, partly because of their large branch networks. But how large do these networks actually need to be in this age of digital banking?

Fourth, some banks are still weighed down by impaired balance sheets. They need to get rid of legacy assets such as non-performing loans.

Fifth, some banks could improve the way they handle risks. They need to establish a strong risk culture, set up adequate risk governance and integrate it into their overall structure.

And finally, all banks have to adapt to more stringent rules. It is true that they come at a cost, but in the long run, their benefits are greater. Society benefits in any case, but so do the banks. Strong rules help to win people’s trust, and that is an important asset for banks.

A few banks still have some way to go – they still need to adapt their business models; they need to find their competitive advantage. Those banks which want to prosper in the future need to act now.

And it is indeed possible to prosper, even in tough times. Across the euro area, we see about two dozen large banks which constantly outperform their peers. They are based in different countries, they are of different sizes, and they have different business models. 

So it is not about a single successful business model. It is about the whole set-up of how to do banking today. And, as these banks show, it is possible to succeed – that is encouraging, for us and for the banks.

These are challenging times for banks; there is no doubt about that. One thing is clear, though: tomorrow’s business models will look different from today’s.

But hasn’t that always been true?

Thank you for your attention.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify