Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

August 2010

 Operational issues

Review of the Eurosystem risk control measures

On 28 July 2010 the ECB announced amendments, as adopted by the Governing Council, to the risk control measures for assets eligible for use as collateral in Eurosystem credit operations. These amendments stem from the biennial review of the Eurosystem risk control measures. The press release also details the new haircut schedule, which will enter into force on 1 January 2011, in line with the Governing Council’s decision of 8 April 2010 to introduce graduated valuation haircuts for lower-rated assets. 

 Payment systems and market infrastructure

Legal framework for the TARGET2 Simulator

On 29 July 2010 the Governing Council adopted Decision ECB/2010/9 on access to and use of certain TARGET2 data. This Decision governs the access to and use by the TARGET2 overseers and the TARGET2 operators of certain data in the context of the TARGET2 Simulator, a device which will allow quantitative analyses and numerical simulations with transaction-level data for the purposes of ensuring the efficient functioning of TARGET2 and its oversight.

New Short-Term European Paper (STEP) market convention 

On 5 August 2010 the Governing Council, having taken note of the new STEP market convention and the assumption of sole responsibility for the STEP labelling process by the STEP Market Secretariat, approved the discontinuation of the Eurosystem’s involvement in this activity with immediate effect. More information on the STEP market is available on the ECB’s website.

 Financial stability and supervision

The Eurosystem’s response to the European Commission’s public consultation on short selling

On 5 August 2010 the Governing Council approved the Eurosystem’s response to the European Commission’s public consultation on short selling and authorised its publication on the ECB’s website. 

 Advice on legislation 

ECB Opinion on the containment of public expenditure, as regards the Banca d’Italia

On 26 July 2010 the Governing Council adopted this opinion at the request of the Italian Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance (CON/2010/58). 

ECB Opinion on the careers of Deutsche Bundesbank civil servants

On 29 July 2010 the Governing Council adopted this opinion at the request of the Deutsche Bundesbank (CON/2010/59).

ECB Opinion on the minimum reserves framework in Estonia

On 2 August 2010 the Governing Council adopted this opinion at the request of Eesti Pank (CON/2010/60). 

ECB Opinion on certain competences of the Governing Council of Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National Bank)

On 3 August 2010 the Governing Council adopted this opinion at the request of the Governor of Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National Bank) (CON/2010/61). 

ECB Opinion on amendments to various laws regarding the reduction of financial imbalances in Hungary

On 4 August 2010 the Governing Council adopted this opinion at the request of the Hungarian Ministry of the National Economy (CON/2010/62). 

ECB Opinion on implementing rules regarding compensation systems at institutions and insurance companies

On 5 August 2010 the Governing Council adopted this opinion at the request of the German Federal Ministry of Finance (CON/2010/63).

 Statistics

ECB Regulation of 23 July 2010 amending Regulation ECB/2001/18 concerning statistics on interest rates applied by monetary financial institutions to deposits and loans vis-à-vis households and non-financial corporations (ECB/2010/7)

On 23 July 2010 the Governing Council adopted this Regulation extending the transitional provisions for the definition of the minimum national sample size from December 2010 to December 2013.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

ECB announces review of the Eurosystem risk control measures

Payment systems and market infrastructure

New Short-Term European Paper (STEP) market convention

Financial stability and supervision

Commission public consultation on short selling - Eurosystem reply

Advice on legislation

CON/2010/58

CON/2010/59

CON/2010/60

CON/2010/61

CON/2010/62

CON/2010/63

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify