Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

January 2010

 Payment systems and market infrastructure

Brochure on the Correspondent Central Banking Model (CCBM) 

On 4 January 2010 the Governing Council authorised the publication of an updated brochure entitled “CCBM procedures for Eurosystem counterparties – December 2009”. 

TARGET2-Securities progress report 

On 14 January 2010 the Governing Council considered the state of progress of the T2S project. It decided that the Central Securities Depositories (CSDs) would migrate to T2S one by one, approved the eligibility criteria for CSDs to connect to T2S and extended the current mandates of the T2S Advisory Group and the CSD Contact Group until the entry into force of the Framework Agreement between the Eurosystem and the CSDs. Detailed information will be made available in due course on the ECB's website.

 Financial stability and supervision

Publication of structural indicators for the EU banking sector 

On 14 January 2010 the Governing Council approved the publication of structural indicators for the EU banking sector. These indicators provide information, inter alia, on the number of credit institutions, the number of branches and subsidiaries of credit institutions from the EU and third countries, the total assets and the number of employees of credit institutions as well as on the concentration of the banking sector in each EU Member State. 

 Advice on legislation 

ECB Opinion on banknote and coin reproduction in Hungary

On 5 January 2010, at the request of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the reproduction of forint and euro banknotes and of forint and euro coins in Hungary (CON/2010/1).

ECB Opinion on national statistics in Estonia

On 6 January 2010, at the request of the Estonian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a new legal framework for the production of national statistics (CON/2010/2).

ECB Opinion on French banking and financial legislation

On 7 January 2010, at the request of French Ministry for Economic Affairs, Industry and Employment, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on certain measures concerning banking and financial regulation (CON/2010/3).

ECB Opinion on French legislation on supervision

On 8 January 2010, at the request of the French Ministry for Economic Affairs, Industry and Employment, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the merger of the banking and insurance licensing and supervisory authorities (CON/2010/4).

ECB Opinion on Union legislation concerning European supervisory authorities

On 8 January 2010, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on three proposals for regulations of the European Parliament and of the Council establishing a European Banking Authority, a European Insurance and Occupational Pensions Authority and a European Securities and Markets Authority (CON/2010/5). The Opinion will be published shortly in the 
Official Journal of the EU
.

ECB Opinion on Union legislation concerning the prospectus and harmonisation of transparency requirements related to securities issuers

On 11 January 2010, at the request of the EU Council, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directives 2003/71/EC and 2004/109/EC (CON/2010/6). The Opinion will be published shortly in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 and on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on recovery measures and supervision in the banking and financial sector and on the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique 

On 11 January 2010, at the request of the Belgian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on recovery measures that apply to undertakings in the banking and financial sector, on the supervision of the financial sector and financial services and on the statutes of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique (CON/2010/7).

ECB Opinion on Greek legislation concerning restructuring of debt and credit bureau data processing

On 13 January 2010, at the request of the Greek Ministry of Economy, Competitiveness and Shipping, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on restructuring of business and professional debts owed to credit institutions and on credit bureau data processing (CON/2010/8).

ECB Opinion on the consolidation of deposit banks in Finland

On 13 January 2010, at the request of the Finnish Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted this opinion (CON/2010/9).

 Corporate governance

2010 Eurosystem Procurement Coordination Office (EPCO) budget and procurement plan

On 22 December 2009 the Governing Council approved the 2010 EPCO budget and procurement plan.

 Banknotes 

Annual progress report on the implementation of the banknote recycling framework

On 7 January 2010, having taken note that good progress had been made during 2009 in the formal implementation of the Banknote Recycling Framework (BRF) by credit institutions and in its application and also that the BRF would be replaced in 2010 by an ECB Decision, the Governing Council decided that national central banks would continue to closely monitor compliance with the BRF by credit institutions and other professional cash handlers in 2010.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Payment systems and market infrastructure

T2S - Settling without border

Financial stability and supervision

Structural indicators for the EU banking sector

Advice on legislation

CON/2010/1

CON/2010/2

CON/2010/3

CON/2010/4

CON/2010/5

CON/2010/6

CON/2010/7

CON/2010/8

CON/2010/9

ECB opinions [en]

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify