Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Claudia Buch
Chair of the Supervisory Board of the ECB

INTERVIEW

Interview with 
Perspektiven der Wirtschaftspolitik

Interview with Claudia Buch, Chair of the Supervisory Board of the ECB,
        conducted by Karen Horn 

13 May 2026 

Professor Buch, the current geopolitical situation seems uncomfortably fragile and Europe finds itself in
            a tough spot between aggressive superpowers. Do we need to be concerned about our banks on top of all
            that?

At the moment the indicators for the banking sector are looking good. Levels of capital have risen since the
        financial and sovereign debt crisis and are fairly stable. Liquidity conditions are also good. Banks’
        profitability has improved, driven by the increase in interest rates compared with the low-interest rate era.
        The share of non-performing loans, which soared during the financial crisis and the European sovereign debt
        crisis, has fallen from an average of 7.5% in 2015 to around 2%. The change is particularly positive for those
        countries where the non-performing exposures were above average to begin with, such as Cyprus, Greece, or Spain.
        In all countries, the share of banks' non-performing exposures is now firmly in the single digits. There has
        been a very slight increase in recent years – would you like to guess where this has occurred?

Here?

Exactly – in those countries where the share of non-performing loans during the crisis was very low, including
        Germany or Austria. Overall, however, this does not change the fact that the resilience of the European banking
        sector has improved significantly. This is due to better regulation and supervision, as well as improved risk
        management on the part of banks. It was very important that the shocks of recent years – the COVID-19 pandemic
        and the energy crisis linked to Russia’s invasion of Ukraine – have been buffered by fiscal to a large extent.
        As a result, these major shocks didn’t affect banks’ balance sheets.

Will it stay that way?

There are indeed a number of risks, especially geopolitical ones. The effects of the US government's tariff hikes
        and higher energy costs are only gradually affecting companies and banks' balance sheets. Banks need to assess
        and manage the risks in a forward-looking manner, thus safeguarding their resilience. 

Supervisors support this with clear priorities: first, we focus on improving banks’ resilience to macroeconomic
        and geopolitical risks, including climate and environmental risks; and second, banks need to be operationally
        resilient. They need to be able to deal with cyber risks for example, and have robust internal information
        systems to manage risks.

At the moment the ECB directly supervises around 112 major European banks. Do you think that these banks
            appreciate your supportive but very close supervision – or do they find it too intrusive?

That question is for the banks themselves.
 
Of course, supervision and regulation are not always
        met with enthusiasm. That is why we maintain a close dialogue with the banks and make our processes as efficient
        and comprehensible as possible.
 
Overall, I think that banks appreciate the benefits of European
        supervision. Today we can compare banks much better than at the beginning of the banking union, ensure uniform
        standards and show good practices in the sector. 

In the case of less significant institutions, we have a coordinating role, as these banks continue to be
        supervised at the national level. In Germany in particular, this affects a relatively large part of the banking
        sector, accounting for about 40% of banks' assets, compared with 16% for the euro area as a whole. A large part
        of these less significant banks are classified as “small and non-complex institutions” (SNCIs), and the
        reporting requirements for those banks are already significantly lighter. 

There is certainly a scientific and political debate as to whether banking regulation and supervision
            have gone too far and become too complex, hampering growth and weakening international
            competitiveness.

I don't think that's true, but we still take this discussion very seriously. We have a comprehensive reform
        agenda to simplify our processes, and to become more efficient, effective and risk-based. We are not lowering
        our supervisory standards – on the contrary, protecting banks’ resilience is central for us. As for the
        discussion on international competitiveness, the Basel Committee provides international minimum standards which
        does not mean that all regulations have to be exactly the same; there is scope for national implementation.
        Overall, the capital requirements for European banks are comparable to those in other major jurisdictions.
        Empirically, well-capitalised banks tend to be more efficient, more profitable and therefore more competitive.
    

Then why the constant complaints about increased capital requirements?

Equity capital is a form of financing like any other, but banks see it as expensive compared with debt. One
        reason for this can be implicit fiscal guarantees: if depositors or other lenders expect the government to step
        in and absorb losses in a crisis, then the cost of debt does not reflect the actual risks. The different tax
        treatment of debt and equity also plays a role: interest payments are often tax-deductible. From the point of
        view of society, however, the advantages of banks having adequate levels of capitalisation clearly dominate:
        well-capitalised banks can absorb potential losses on their own, and the government does not have to use
        taxpayers’ money to intervene. Well-capitalised banks can lend more and better take the associated risks. This
        is especially important in times of crisis. 

Does the time horizon of banks’ management play a role here?

Certainly. If banks look at the next few quarters only, they may choose riskier strategies to boost profitability
        in the short term. Lower capital automatically increases the return on equity. At the same time, though, the
        bank becomes more risky; if it gets into trouble, there is less loss-absorbing capital available. Therefore,
        from a supervisory point of view, we consider the long-term viability of banks' business models. For example, if
        banks want to conduct share buybacks that we need to approve, they have to provide us with a solid medium-term
        capital plan over a three-year period. 

What about the too-big-to-fail risk – do we now have this under control?

There has been a whole package of reforms to address the negative externalities of large banks for financial
        stability. First, we now have the Single Resolution Mechanism, a new European institution with the regulatory
        framework necessary for the resolution of banks. There is an industry-funded fund to cover the costs of
        financial distress. Second, large banks now have to meet higher capital requirements; the surcharge is intended
        to capture their systemic risk externality. In addition, there are additional requirements for bail-inable debt
        capital, which can be converted into loss-absorbing capital in a crisis. Third, supervision has become more
        intensive. 

Several years ago, the Financial Stability Board (FSB) published a comprehensive evaluation report on these
        reforms.
[
1
]
 It shows progress. For example, the pricing of bonds
        issued by banks now better reflects the underlying risks. Banks have thus better incentives to avoid excessive
        risk-taking. But the report also shows that there is work to be done. For example, Europe still has no common
        deposit insurance. There are unresolved issues around how liquidity would be provided in the event of
        resolution. Closing these gaps is crucial for the system to remain resilient against crises. 

Supervision can only be as good as its institutional set-up. What is your experience – does European
            banking supervision have sufficient resources in terms of staff, tools and sanctioning options?

At the ECB, around 1,500 people work in supervision and we cooperate very closely with colleagues in national
        authorities. This means that we are well-staffed, but of course we also have to set priorities. In terms of
        supervisory instruments, our toolkit is quite complete, including the imposition of sanctions, for example if
        banks violate directly applicable EU legislation. We may impose periodic penalty payments if we conclude that a
        bank does not comply with legally binding obligations and has not remedied the identified deficiencies within a
        given deadline. We apply these instruments very proportionally: where necessary, we use the tools given to us by
        the legislators, but gradually and in a structured process so that banks can prepare.

How does this work in practice?

One example is the risk management of banks to identify, assess and manage climate and environmental risks. Let
        me give you an example of why this matters for supervisors. If banks grant loans in regions threatened by
        physical risk such as floods, they need to take this into account in collateral valuation. Since 2019, we have
        been particularly focusing on climate- and nature-related risk management. At that time many banks paid little
        attention to climate risks. The situation has improved significantly in the meantime, because we have taken a
        step-by-step approach and formulated clear expectations. In 2020, we published a guide on climate-related and
        environmental risks to provide transparency on how banks should manage and disclose climate risks. In 2022, we
        conducted a stress test on climate risks and informed the banks where their risk management could be improved.
        For any deficiencies we found relevant, we issued binding decisions that included potential penalty payments if
        the banks failed to meet the requirements. However, we had to use this option only in very few cases. For all
        these measures, it is key for us to remain proportionate: we start with moral suasion and adjust our instruments
        if a bank’s actions are insufficient or too slow. 

Earlier, you mentioned the lack of deposit insurance. Why are we not there yet? 

This is, to a large extent, a political issue. The European banking union is designed with three pillars:
        supervision, resolution and deposit insurance. The first two pillars have been in place for a decade. In the
        case of deposit insurance, the issue was how to deal with the high level of non-performing exposures at the
        beginning of the banking union. In the meantime, legacy assets have been significantly reduced and the level of
        non-performing exposures on banks’ balance sheets is currently low; nevertheless, there are risks on the
        horizon. This is why now is the right time to think about concrete steps towards a European deposit insurance
        scheme. 

Is anything happening in that regard?

A certain dynamic is indeed gaining momentum in the political process. After all, one of the goals of the banking
        union is to break the sovereign-bank nexus, that is the interdependence of risks between banks and states. In
        the meantime, through the Single Resolution Fund, there are more resources from the industry to deal with
        financial distress. But a European deposit guarantee scheme would be key to further decoupling risks and
        ensuring that all depositors are equally protected. It would also promote market integration: currently, just
        under 2% of deposits are invested cross-border, meaning that the European banking market remains highly
        fragmented along national borders. Incomplete market integration is the real structural issue for banks’
        competitiveness – far more so than how regulation or supervision compare internationally. And I am convinced
        that bank customers would also benefit from a more integrated market. 

Are the newly emerging risks distributed unevenly across regions and could this complicate the political
            process of reaching agreement on deposit insurance? Comparable, for instance, to the way that the
            geopolitical risk of the threat posed by Russia is perceived less acutely in southern Europe than in eastern
            European countries, which creates challenges for Europe's collective defence capacity? Do views on the need
            for deposit insurance also differ from region to region?

I don’t think so. Geopolitical risks can affect small, regionally active banks just as much as large ones with an
        international presence. Cyber risk is a case in point. It can affect any bank and is often largely driven by
        geopolitical motives. In recent years, we have seen not only a much larger number of cyberattacks on banks but
        also more severe attacks. And these attacks are not always related to banks’ geographical proximity to conflict
        zones. Because all banks can be affected by geopolitical risks, we developed a framework for dealing with those
        risks two years ago. This framework describes the channels through which geopolitical risks can be transmitted
        to banks. 

What channels are these? 

One important channel is, of course, the financial market channel – such as sudden increases in risk premia and
        market revaluations triggered by geopolitical events, as we saw, for example, after the announcement of new
        tariffs in April 2025. And the real economy obviously plays an important role too. If firms are severely
        affected by tariffs, supply chain disruptions or higher energy prices, the quality of credit portfolios may
        deteriorate. And it goes without saying that there are concrete operational risks related to cyberattacks and
        outsourcing. The spectrum is very broad. We are currently working with banks to better understand how they would
        be affected by geopolitical stress scenarios and how they would respond to them. Last year, we conducted a
        European stress test with a common scenario for all banks with regard to tariffs and financial market turmoil.
        Overall, banks have sufficient capital buffers to absorb losses in an adverse scenario. We are now carrying out
        a reverse stress test. We set the capital loss for banks at 300 basis points and ask which adverse scenario
        would lead to a loss of that magnitude. This stress test is based on banks’ internal risk management tools,
        thereby reducing the costs that stress tests place on banks.

What were the results? 

The aggregated results will be available in the summer, but we are already working with the banks to understand
        their scenarios.

You mentioned national fragmentation of Europe’s banking market. What would be the benefit of deeper
            integration?

Banks operate under very different legal, tax and institutional frameworks across national markets. This makes
        cross-border activities costly. A genuine single market for banking services would simplify the system, allow
        for more effective risk sharing and make it easier for banks to reap economies of scale and efficiency benefits.
        Of course, stronger competition can also lead banks to pursue riskier strategies or mean that some individual
        banks have to leave the market. But that is precisely why we have a European supervisory and resolution
        framework.

Back to the risks to the banking sector. Usually the risks include shadow banks, also referred to as the
            non-bank financial sector. 

Yes, indeed. Since the financial crisis, banks have become more tightly regulated and more resilient. But this
        has not impaired their ability to provide services to the economy or to extend credit. On the contrary, they are
        better prepared for more challenging times. At the same time, however, the non-bank financial sector has
        expanded globally. On the one hand, this sector consists of pension funds and insurance companies which perform
        different functions than banks and are regulated accordingly. On the other, there is a growing segment of
        non-listed securities and debt financing – often referred to as “private credit” or “private markets”. We are
        closely assessing whether this creates risks for banks. Parts of these markets have relatively high levels of
        indebtedness and there is comparatively limited transparency about who is interlinked with whom and who lends to
        whom. Banks are often closely linked to private markets. They need to reflect this in their risk management and,
        more broadly, we need more information to be able to assess risks more accurately. 

How is this progressing?

The Financial Stability Board is working to increase transparency at the global level, but the implementation of
        its proposals is still too slow. In the interest of global financial stability, it is important that we have a
        better understanding of the non-bank financial sector and address systemic risks. 

Within the ECB itself, you have launched a number of reforms to streamline banking supervision processes.
            What are you doing in this area and why is it necessary?

We have achieved a great deal in establishing common standards and methodologies, but our processes have become
        quite complex over time. At the same time, we have to operate in a fundamentally changed environment – marked by
        geopolitical risks, but also by the digitalisation of the financial sector. This is why we are now streamlining
        all of our core supervisory processes. Our colleagues need sufficient time to focus on what really matters. Our
        reforms started back in 2022. At the time, my predecessor Andrea Enria set up an advisory group of independent
        experts to make recommendations on how to improve our annual health check, the Supervisory Review and Evaluation
        Process (SREP), for banks. When I arrived, the report of this expert group was already on my desk. In May 2024
        we decided on a comprehensive reform of the SREP to make our processes more efficient, more effective and more
        risk-based. This also means clearer and more structured communication with banks about our supervisory
        expectations. Moreover, we are now taking a multi-year approach – not every risk needs to be assessed for every
        bank with the same intensity every year. We will complete this SREP reform this year.

What else do you plan to do besides the SREP reform?

We are applying the objectives of the reform to all key supervisory processes – within the existing regulations
        and without weakening resilience.
[
2
]
 For example,
 
every
        new banking licence in Europe requires our approval, as does the withdrawal of a banking licence. Such
        authorisation procedures can be very demanding and complex administrative processes. We have introduced a more
        risk-based approach, with standardised formats for submitting information. That alone already streamlines the
        procedures. 

Could you give an example? 

One example is our fit and proper assessment of new members of banks’ management bodies. From the submission of
        documentation to conducting interviews with the candidates, there is a considerable amount of work involved.
        Until now, this has taken around 100 days, but we were able to significantly shorten the time this process
        takes. Or take the approval process for the use of securitisations. We need to assess whether a significant risk
        transfer has taken place, which leads to lower capital requirements. In less complex cases that do not entail
        major risks, this now takes around ten days instead of three months. 

How is that possible?

Rest assured, this does not mean we're waving through in ten days what we previously scrutinised intensively over
        three months. We remain risk-based. Standardisation is very helpful as it gives banks a clearer understanding of
        what we focus on. Cases that meet the standard and do not involve major risks can be handled more quickly. We
        then devote the resources that are freed up in this way to reviewing more complex requests and analysing
        systemic effects. We are now extending this approach to all our procedures, and we are of course also taking
        feedback on our supervision into account. With regard to on-site inspections, for example, we have heard that
        inspectors sometimes request information that other ECB teams already have. That is why our teams work closely
        together to avoid duplication. This is backed up by a whole range of IT projects designed to streamline and
        digitalise our internal processes. 

How does artificial intelligence (AI) help you with all this?

We receive a lot of information from the banks. AI helps us process this information faster. AI also helps with
        the fit-and-proper decisions on banks’ board members I mentioned before, by sifting through the CVs and making
        an initial assessment. Of course, this does not replace the work of those responsible for the decisions.
        Supervision requires a significant level of judgement and experience that AI cannot replace. But AI does reduce
        manual processes. 

Banks also use AI to make their internal processes more efficient. We therefore examine the impact of
        digitalisation on banks’ operations – both its opportunities and risks. The key question is whether AI can
        improve the processing of information. Banks need to constantly assess credit risks, because of course that is
        their core business – and whether or not AI can actually improve such analysis will be decisive. 

In addition, AI is also amplifying all digital risks. 

Certainly. Most banks outsource certain services and thus become dependent on service providers in some way – and
        these can be AI firms. This is why there is now a new initiative – the EU regulation strengthening digital
        security in the financial sector, the Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) – to better capture outsourcing
        and the associated risks across different financial institutions. If many banks use the same provider for their
        outsourcing and that provider falls victim to a cyberattack, this may give rise to systemic risk. For the
        individual bank, these systemic risks are difficult to assess, so good supervision plays a central role here.
    

Where do you see unresolved issues internally? 

Right now, we are focusing on implementing the agreed reforms. Our internal supervisory culture is very important
        here – we want all colleagues to feel involved and use the momentum to improve their daily work processes. This
        applies not only to the people who work here in Frankfurt, but of course also to colleagues in the national
        authorities we work closely with. We have two more key projects this year. First, we are revising our guides for
        banks with a view to better explaining our supervisory interpretations and good practices, better communicating
        our expectations to banks and clearly stating that these guides are not legally binding. And second, we are
        exploring ways to make our supervision and reporting obligations even more proportionate – while of course
        keeping them commensurate with the underlying risks. 

And overall, with regard to the entire financial system? 

At the moment, we are facing tensions that pose risks to strong regulation and supervision. On the one hand,
        risks have clearly increased, and there is less fiscal space than in the past to cushion shocks. On the other
        hand, the memory of the financial crisis almost 20 years ago is fading; the high costs of financial crises are
        not present in people’s minds anymore. Therefore, the temptation may be great for politicians to loosen
        regulation in the hope of boosting growth. However, resilience and growth are not in conflict – there is
        extensive empirical evidence to this effect. We need to have this discussion, but on the basis of good evidence,
        which we have both here at the ECB and thanks to many other, external studies. This is why we aim to further
        expand the infrastructure for evidence-based decision-making.
[
3
]

 FSB (2021), 
Evaluation of the effects of too-big-to-fail reforms: Final
                        Report
, 
31 March. 

 ECB (2025), 
Simplification of the European prudential regulatory, supervisory and
                        reporting framework
, December. 

 Buch, C.: “
Evidence-based supervision: addressing evolving risks, maintaining resilience
“, speech of 9 December 2025; and 
             “
Financial stability, supervision and regulation
“, speech of 10 September 2025.
            

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify