Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Interview with Les Echos

Interview with Pentti Hakkarainen, Member on the Supervisory Board of the ECB, conducted by Solenn Poullenec on 12 June 2018

What is your approach to fintech firms who are moving into banking? 

We have published guidelines for fintechs seeking to obtain a banking licence. We take the same approach to them as we do to traditional banks. We supervise them according to the same criteria. We do not wish to promote certain business models over others and we are neutral in respect of the technology used. We support the advance of new technologies and the boost to competitiveness but we don't want to encourage these developments by relaxing the rules or by taking a different supervisory approach. 

Do fintechs present any particular risks?

We want to make sure that they understand and manage their risks. The difficulty is to keep up to date with changes which can occur very swiftly in financial technologies. Some firms use artificial intelligence or machine learning models. In order to manage the risks, not only the managers of fintechs or banks but also supervisors need to fully understand how these tools work. Another element that we need to look at closely in the context of fintechs and financial technologies is outsourcing, which can also be a source of risk. 

Could there be systemic risks linked to fintechs? 

We do not see compelling financial stability risks. Nevertheless, we are vigilant. We are paying very close attention to cyber risks. They can affect any kind of business but they may be particularly significant in certain areas of finance. We are also paying attention to the systemic risks that could emerge if there is only one or a small handful of providers available for a given financial technology. If the provider or providers were to run into problems, a lot of stakeholders could be affected. 

What impact do you think fintechs could have on the European financial sector? 

Fintechs and financial technologies could drive the banks to improve the quality of their services and to make them cheaper for consumers. More generally, the evolution of financial technologies and of the fintechs should lead to more banking services that are easy to access across borders. Given that we now have European banking supervision in place, this could bring about a more integrated European financial services market and speed up the consolidation in this sector.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify