Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates) August 2005

Operational issues 

Indicative calendars for Eurosystem tender operations and reserve maintenance periods

The Governing Council approved indicative calendars for Eurosystem tender operations and reserve maintenance periods in 2006. Details are provided in two press releases published on the ECB’s website on 4 August 2005 in all official Community languages.

Payment systems

Central banks’ provision of retail payment services in euro to credit institutions 

The Governing Council approved a policy statement for the provision of retail payment services in euro to credit institutions, which will be published shortly on the ECB’s website in all official Community languages. The NCBs of the ESCB that are not members of the Eurosystem have also subscribed to this policy position.

Financial stability and supervision

Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission’s public consultation on the Green Paper on Financial Services Policy (2005-2010) 

The Governing Council approved the above-mentioned contribution, which is available on all Eurosystem websites.

Advice on legislation 

ECB Opinion on the regulation of lobbying in Slovakia

On 3 August 2005, at the request of the Slovak Ministry of Justice
,
 the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the regulation of lobbying, including lobbying activities in relation to Národná banka Slovenska (CON/2005/25). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on financial market supervision in Slovakia

On 4 August 2005, at the request of Národná banka Slovenska
,
 the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on Národná banka Slovenska’s task in relation to integrated supervision of the whole financial market and amendments to its statutes (CON/2005/26). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Indicative calendar: reserve maintenance periods for 2006, press release

Indicative calendar: the Eurosystem’s tender operations in 2006, press release

Financial stability and supervision

Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission’s public consultation on the Green Paper on Financial Services Policy (2005-2010), pdf 73 kB

Advice on legislation

Opinion: regulation of lobbying in Slovakia (CON/2005/25)

Opinion: financial market supervision in Slovakia (CON/2005/26)

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify