Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

February 2005

 Operational issues 

Eurosystem collateral framework (single list): issues relating to bank loans

Further to an earlier decision to include bank loans in the future single list of eligible collateral for Eurosystem credit operations (see the ECB’s press release of 5 August 2004), the Governing Council decided that, as from 1 January 2012, a unified regime would be in place for the use of bank loans as collateral with a single threshold of €500,000 and a common Eurosystem credit assessment framework. An intermediate regime will be put in place starting on 1 January 2007, under which a number of euro area NCBs will already opt for a threshold of at least €500,000. No limits will be applied to the use of bank loans by a counterparty. In 2010 this intermediate regime will be reviewed to prepare the transition to the unified regime in 2012. 

The implementation of monetary policy in the euro area: General Documentation on Eurosystem monetary policy instruments and procedures

The Governing Council approved the revised General Documentation and adopted Guideline ECB/2005/2, amending Guideline ECB/2000/7, to which the General Documentation is annexed. The General Documentation will be published in the Official Journal of the EU on 30 May 2005, when the new Guideline enters into force. For information purposes, these documents will be posted on the ECB’s website on 21 February 2005 in all official Community languages. 

 Payment systems 

TARGET2 progress report

The TARGET2 progress report was published on the ECB’s website on 8 February 2005. It gives details on three main issues: service, pricing and migration to TARGET2.

Connection of Narodowy Bank Polski to TARGET 

The Governing Council agreed to allow Narodowy Bank Polski to connect its RTGS system to the TARGET system. This decision will take effect on 7 March 2005. Guideline ECB/2005/1, which provides the legal framework for establishing this connection, was adopted on 21 January 2005 and published in the Official Journal of the EU on 3 February 2005 and subsequently on the ECB’s website.

 Financial stability and supervision 

The Commission’s review of the application of the Lamfalussy framework to EU securities market legislation – the Eurosystem’s contribution to the Commission’s public consultation

The Governing Council approved the Eurosystem’s contribution to the Commission’s public consultation on the Commission’s review of the application of the Lamfalussy framework to EU securities market legislation. The Eurosystem gave a generally positive assessment of how the Lamfalussy process was working and made some specific proposals for further improvements. The Eurosystem’s contribution was sent to the Commission on 17 February 2005 and will be published shortly on the ECB’s website.

 Advice on legislation 

ECB Opinion on a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council on the prevention of the use of the financial system for the purpose of money laundering, including terrorist financing (CON/2005/2)

The Opinion was requested by the Council of the European Union and was adopted by the Governing Council on 4 February 2005. It was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 17 February 2005 and on the ECB’s website on 18 February 2005.

ECB Opinion on a draft regulation on the processing and distribution of forint banknotes and coins (CON/2005/3) 

The Opinion was requested by Magyar Nemzeti Bank and was adopted by the Governing Council on 9 February 2005. It was published on the ECB’s website on 10 February 2005.

ECB Opinion on a proposal for directives of the European Parliament and of the Council re-casting Directive 2000/12/EC of the European Parliament and of the Council of 20 March 2000 relating to the taking up and pursuit of the business of credit institutions and Council Directive 93/6/EEC of 15 March 1993 on the capital adequacy of investment firms and credit institutions (CON/2005/4)

The Opinion was requested by the Council of the European Union and was adopted by the Governing Council on 17 February 2005. It will be published on the ECB’s website on 21 February 2005 and in the Official Journal of the EU.

 Statistics 

ECB Guideline on government finance statistics

The Governing Council adopted a Guideline laying down the procedures for exchanging statistical information within the ESCB in the field of government finance statistics (ECB/2005/5). The Guideline will be published in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

Update of the ECB Guideline on money and banking statistics

The Governing Council adopted a Guideline amending Guideline ECB/2003/2, in order to reflect some changes in requirements and formats for the exchange of money and banking statistics within the Eurosystem (ECB/2005/4). The Guideline will be published in the Official Journal of the EU and on the ECB’s website.

 Corporate governance 

ECB Recommendation on the external auditors of the Banco de Portugal

The Governing Council adopted a Recommendation to the EU Council on the external auditors of the Banco de Portugal (ECB/2005/3). The Recommendation will be published shortly on the ECB’s website and in the Official Journal of the EU.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Payment systems

TARGET2 progress reports and press releases

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify