Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates) October 2005

Operational issues

Eurosystem collateral

On 7 October 2005 the Governing Council approved the inclusion of EuroMTF, a new market operated by the Luxembourg Stock Exchange, as a non-regulated market accepted by the ECB for Eurosystem collateral management purposes. An updated list of non-regulated markets accepted by the ECB is available on the ECB’s website.

Payment systems and market infrastructure

TARGET2 - Second progress report

The second TARGET2 progress report has been published on the ECB’s website today. The report provides information on the envisaged start and migration dates, pricing, liquidity pooling, and operational and contingency arrangements.

Financial stability and supervision

EU banking sector stability

On 4 October 2005 the Governing Council authorised the publication of a report on “EU banking sector stability” prepared by the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC). The report contains the main findings of the BSC’s regular annual macro-prudential analysis of EU banking sector stability. It was published on the ECB’s website on 17 October 2005.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on Community legislation relating to the harmonised index of consumer prices

On 4 October 2005, at the request of the European Commission, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the common index reference periods for the harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) (CON/2005/33). The Opinion was published in the Official Journal of the EU on 14 October 2005 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the Banca d’Italia’s structure and internal governance

On 6 October 2005, at the request of the Italian Ministry of Economy and Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on changes to the Banca d’Italia’s structure and internal governance resulting from a law on the protection of savings (CON/2005/34). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the Cypriot minimum reserve regime

On 10 October 2005, at the request of the Central Bank of Cyprus, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on amendments to the Central Bank of Cyprus’s minimum reserve regime (CON/2005/35). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Czech insolvency legislation

On 18 October 2005, at the request of the Czech Ministry of Justice, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on modernisation of the insolvency framework introducing new means of resolving insolvency and strengthening creditors’ rights (CON/2005/36). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Current list of non-regulated markets accepted by the ECB

Payment systems and market infrastructure

Second progress report on TARGET2 - October 2005

Financial stability and supervision

EU banking sector stability

Advice on legislation

Opinion on the common index reference periods for the harmonised index of consumer prices (HICP) (CON/2005/33)

Opinion on changes to the Banca d’Italia’s structure and internal governance resulting from a law on the protection of savings (CON/2005/34)

Opinion on amendments to the Central Bank of Cyprus’s minimum reserve regime (CON/2005/35)

Opinion on modernisation of the insolvency framework introducing new means of resolving insolvency and strengthening creditors' rights (CON/2005/36)

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify