Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

January 2005

 Operational issues 

Volume of longer-term refinancing operations in 2005

The Governing Council decided on the allotment volume for the longer-term refinancing operations for 2005. A press release with further information has been published today on the ECB’s website.

New procedures for the transfer of securities used as collateral for Eurosystem credit operations 

The Governing Council decided that relayed links between securities settlement systems may be used for the cross-border transfer of securities used as collateral for Eurosystem credit operations. A press release with further information has been published today on the ECB’s website.

 Advice on legislation 

Opinion on the draft State Budget Law for 2005 amending Law 41/1999 of 12 December 1999 on payment and securities settlement systems and Law 13/1994 of 1 June 1994 on the autonomy of the Banco de España (CON/2004/39)

The Opinion was requested by the Spanish Ministry for Economic Affairs and Finance and was adopted by the Governing Council on 23 December 2004. It was published on the ECB’s website on 24 December 2004. 

 Statistics 

Quality and availability of statistics

The annual assessment has been carried out of whether the availability and quality of statistics meet the ECB’s requirements. This involves, among other things, assessing the quality of the quarterly financial accounts, in line with Article 7 of Guideline ECB/2002/7, and reporting on the quality of the euro area balance of payments and international investment position statistics, as required by Guideline ECB/2004/15. The report, including quantitative quality indicators, and a press release giving further information have been published today on the ECB’s website. 

 Organisation 

Eurosystem Mission Statement

The Governing Council adopted the Eurosystem Mission Statement, which refers to the Eurosystem’s strategic intents and a set of organisational principles. These three texts were published on 13 January 2005 on the websites of the Eurosystem central banks.

Conclusion of the design competition for the new ECB premises

Having evaluated the revised design concepts of the three prize-winning designs for the ECB’s new premises in Frankfurt am Main, the Governing Council chose the proposal of the Vienna-based office COOP HIMMELB(L)AU as the design. A press release with further information was published on the ECB’s website on 13 January 2005

Chairs of Eurosystem/ESCB committees 

The Governing Council appointed Chairs of two Eurosystem/ESCB committees: Mr Klaus Gressenbauer was appointed Chair of the Internal Auditors Committee (IAC) and Mr Wolfgang Schill was appointed Chair of the Monetary Policy Committee (MPC). Both terms of office take immediate effect and will expire on 31 August 2007.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Related documents: 

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Allotment amount of the longer-term refinancing operations in the year 2005, press release

New procedures for the transfer of securities used as collateral for Eurosystem credit operations, press release

Advice on legislation

Opinion (CON/2004/39)

Statistics

Annual quality report on the euro area balance of payments and international investment position statistics, press release

Report, pdf, 911 kB

Organisation

Eurosystem mission statement

Conclusion of the design competition for the new ECB premises, press release

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify