Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

April 2005

 Economic, monetary and financial situation 

Sixth structural issues report

On 7 April 2005 the Governing Council approved the sixth structural issues report, which has been prepared by the Monetary Policy Committee (one of the Eurosystem/ESCB committees). The report provides a comprehensive assessment of the euro area’s competitiveness and export performance, and reviews the factors underlying this performance. It will be published as an Occasional Paper on the ECB’s website in the second half of May.

 Operational issues 

Assessment of securities settlement systems against user standards for Eurosystem credit operations

The Governing Council updated the assessment of securities settlement systems eligible for the settlement of Eurosystem credit operations against the “Standards for the use of EU securities settlement systems in ESCB credit operations”, published in 1998. A press release with further information was published on the ECB’s website on 21 April 2005

 Advice on legislation 

ECB Opinion on Lithuanian minimum reserve requirements

On 1 April 2005, at the request of Lietuvos bankas, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on draft rules on minimum reserve requirements for credit institutions (CON/2005/8). The Opinion was published on the ECB’s website on 14 April 2005.

ECB Opinion on the status in Belgium of securities settlement and assimilated institutions 

On 15 April 2005, at the request of the Belgian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a draft royal decree on the status of securities settlement and assimilated institutions (CON/2005/9). The Opinion was published on the ECB’s website on 19 April 2005.

 Statistics 

Exchange of confidential statistical information within the ESCB

On 5 April 2005 the Governing Council agreed that confidential statistical data which the ESCB receives from national statistical institutes or the Statistical Office of the European Communities (Eurostat) will only be used for statistical purposes. This decision is in line with Council Regulation (EC) No 322/97 of 17 February 1997 on Community Statistics. 

 Corporate governance 

ECB Recommendations on the external auditors of the Bank of Greece and the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique

On 7 April 2005, the Governing Council adopted Recommendations to the EU Council on the external auditors of the Bank of Greece (ECB/2005/7) and of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique (ECB/2005/8). The Recommendations were published in the Official Journal of the European Union on 15 April 2005 and on the ECB’s website on 19 April 2005.

New chair of the Information Technology Committee 

The Governing Council appointed Mr Hans-Gert Penzel as Chair of the Information Technology Committee, which is one of the Eurosystem/ESCB committees. His term of office starts immediately and will expire on 31 August 2007.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Assessment of securities settlement systems, press release

Advice on legislation

Opinion: Lietuvos bankas (CON/2005/8)

Opinion: Belgian Ministry of Finance (CON/2005/9)

Corporate governance

External auditors Bank of Greece (ECB/2005/7)

External auditors Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique (ECB/2005/8)

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify