Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Contribution to Bild am Sonntag

By Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB, 
15 May 2011

Our currency, the euro, has all what it takes to be an anchor of stability and confidence. The euro unites 331 million citizens of a region that is among the most prosperous in the world. 

For over 12 years now, the European Central Bank – together with all national central banks including in Germany the Bundesbank – has been delivering what it is expected to deliver: price stability in the euro as a whole over the medium-term, with an average annual inflation of less than 2%. In Germany the average yearly inflation has been 1.5% which is a better result than for any such 12 year period over the last 50 years. Thereby, we have been safeguarding the euro’s purchasing power. This has been achieved despite some headwinds to the European economy: oil prices went up; the internet bubble burst; violence and wars have raged in some parts of the world; and starting in 2008 we had to cope with the most severe global financial crisis in over 60 years. 

We can be proud to have a stable and credible currency. There is no crisis of the euro. Instead, what we are currently observing in parts of the euro area is first and foremost a fiscal crisis. Several member states of the euro area have to adjust rigorously their economic and fiscal policy after having made mistakes in the past. All member countries must respect the principles of prudent fiscal policies. Substantial reforms are needed to ensure that common rules are improved and respected by all. 

The current period is still not easy. The citizens can trust that the ECB will ensure price stability in the years to come as we did in the last 12 years. We are on the side of citizens. We know that inflation hurts the weakest members of society most, and we will do all that is necessary to prevent inflation. The euro is the European response to economic integration and globalisation. It is a currency that the citizens can trust.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify