Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

January 2012

 Advice on legislation 

ECB Opinion on the salaries of civil servants in Cyprus

On 4 January 2012 the Governing Council adopted this Opinion at the request of the Cypriot Ministry of Finance (CON/2012/1). 

ECB Opinion on German measures for the stabilisation of the financial market 

On 24 January 2012 the Governing Council adopted this Opinion at the request of the German Federal Ministry of Finance (CON/2012/2).

ECB Opinion on dematerialised securities in Luxembourg 

On 24 January 2012 the Governing Council adopted this Opinion at the request of the Luxembourg Ministry of Finance (CON/2012/3).

ECB Opinion on a guarantee scheme for the liabilities of Italian banks and on the exchange of lira banknotes 

On 24 January 2012 the Governing Council adopted this Opinion at the request of the Italian Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance (CON/2012/4). 

ECB Opinion on a proposal for a Directive on the access to the activity of credit institutions and the prudential supervision of credit institutions and investment firms and a proposal for a Regulation on prudential requirements for credit institutions and investment firms

On 25 January 2012 the Governing Council adopted this Opinion at the request of the Council of the European Union (CON/2012/5). The Opinion will be published in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 and on the ECB’s website. 

 Corporate governance

Chairmanship of the Eurosystem IT Steering Committee (EISC)

On 12 January 2012 the Governing Council appointed Mr Benoît Cœuré, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, as Chair of the EISC with immediate effect.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Advice on legislation

CON/2012/1

CON/2012/2

CON/2012/3

CON/2012/4

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify