Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)
May 2024
10 May 2024
Market operations
Remuneration of government deposits
 
and other non-monetary policy deposits
On 16 April 2024 the Governing Council adopted Decision 
ECB/2024/11
 on the remuneration of non-monetary policy deposits held with national central banks and the European Central Bank, under which the remuneration ceiling for euro area overnight government deposits will remain unchanged at euro short-term rate (€STR) minus 20 basis points. It also adopted two legal acts adjusting the remuneration of other non-monetary policy deposits, namely Guideline 
ECB/2024/12
 amending Guideline (EU) 2019/671 on domestic asset and liability management operations by the national central banks (ECB/2019/7) and Guideline 
ECB/2024/13
 on the Eurosystem’s provision of reserve management services in euro to central banks and countries located outside the euro area and to international organisations. The Decision will apply as of 1 December 2024 at which point the Eurosystem national central banks are expected to comply with the two Guidelines. A related 
press release
 is available on the ECB’s website. 
Macroprudential policy and financial stability
Financial Stability Review – May 2024
On 8 May 2024 the Governing Council held an exchange of views on euro area financial stability issues on the basis of the May 2024 edition of the Financial Stability Review and authorised its publication on the ECB’s website. In addition to providing an overview of key financial stability vulnerabilities in the euro area, this edition includes three special features. The first examines the implications of geopolitical risk for euro area financial stability. The second investigates the financial stability risks and benefits associated with the rise of artificial intelligence, while the third looks closer into the financial stability risks stemming from private markets. The Review is scheduled to be published on the ECB’s website on 16 May 2024.
Market infrastructure and payments
Progress report on the digital euro project
On 8 May 2024 the Governing Council took note of a progress report on the first stage of the 
digital euro
 project – the preparation phase- which concludes that the project is on track both in terms of budget and timing. More detailed information on the 
digital euro project
 is available on the ECB's website.
Status update on the Eurosystem Collateral Management System (ECMS)
On 8 May 2024 the Governing Council took note of a status update on the Eurosystem Collateral Management System (
ECMS
) project. This update follows the Governing Council 
decision
 of November 2023 to reschedule the ECMS project launch to 18 November 2024 and the Governing Council’s request to be kept regularly informed on the status of the project. The update suggested that the overall ECMS project delivery is on track, while some challenges remain.
Advice on legislation
ECB Opinion on the legal framework for the High Council for Financial Stability
On 26 April 2024 the Governing Council adopted Opinion 
CON/2024/11
 prepared on the ECB’s own initiative.
ECB Opinion on the introduction of the euro in Bulgaria
On 2 May 2024 the Governing Council adopted Opinion 
CON/2024/12
 at the request of Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National Bank), acting on behalf of the Bulgarian Minister for Finance.
ECB Opinion on a proposed regulation and directive on payment and electronic money services
On 30 April 2024 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2024/13 at the request of the European Parliament and the Council.
Corporate governance
ECB Recommendation on the external auditors of Národná banka Slovenska
On 18 April 2024 the Governing Council adopted Recommendation 
ECB/2024/14
 to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of Národná banka Slovenska.
Interinstitutional Agreement establishing an EU ethics body
On 2 May 2024 the Governing Council approved the Interinstitutional Agreement establishing an EU ethics body, following negotiations between the Parliament, the Council, the Commission, the Court of Justice, the ECB, the Court of Auditors as well as the Economic and Social Committee and the Committee of Regions, and based on a Commission proposal from May 2023. This body will be tasked with developing common minimum standards for ethical conduct of high-level EU officials. Frank Elderson, Member of the ECB’s Executive Board, will act as ECB Representative to the ethics body and Roman Schremser, ECB Chief Compliance and Governance Officer, as alternate. 
ECB Banking Supervision
Participation of ECB Banking Supervision in the Joint Bank Reporting Committee 
On 22 April 2024 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board for ECB Banking Supervision to participate in the Joint Bank Reporting Committee (JBRC) and its Steering Committee, established as a follow-up to the feasibility report on an integrated reporting system prepared by the European Banking Authority (EBA) in accordance with the provisions of Article 430c of the Capital Requirements Regulation. The related 
Memorandum of Understanding
 on the establishment of the Joint Bank Reporting Committee between the European Central Bank and the European Banking Authority is available on the ECB’s website. 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify