Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)
December 2024
13 December 2024
Market operations
Changes to the publication of monetary policy portfolio data under the pandemic emergency purchase programme (PEPP)
On 5 December 2024 the Governing Council approved changes to the publication of monetary policy portfolio data under the PEPP, because with the discontinuation of reinvestments under the PEPP at the end of 2024 there will be, for the first time since 2014, no bonds purchased by the Eurosystem under either the asset purchase programme (APP) or the PEPP. The changes foreseen will ensure that the level of transparency provided by the data published going forward remains appropriate. In particular, the publication of the primary/secondary market breakdown for the PEPP’s private sector programmes will be discontinued, to align practices with recent changes to the publication regime for the APP’s private sector programmes. In addition, the PEPP data will be published once a month instead of once every two months, to match the equivalent APP data series, and historical monthly data for the series since the start of the programme will be published. The PEPP and APP publication regimes will be further aligned, with the publication of both backward and forward-looking redemption data for the PEPP. All changes, which will be reflected in an updated 
PEPP FAQ
 on the ECB’s website, 
will be implemented as from 8 January 2025. 
Advice on legislation
ECB Opinion on the obligation to accept cash payments
On 6 December 2024 the Governing Council adopted Opinion 
CON/2024/39
 at the request of the Dutch Minister of Finance. 
Corporate governance
Membership of the ECB Audit Committee
On 11 December 2024 the Governing Council appointed Olli Rehn, Governor of Suomen Pankki – Finlands Bank, as member to the 
Audit Committee
 for a term of three years running until end-2027. Mr Rehn will succeed Yannis Stournaras, Governor of the Bank of Greece, whose mandate as member of the Audit Committee has come to an end. 
Statistics
Updated timeline for the harmonisation of banks’ statistical reporting 
On 4 December 2024 the ECB issued a press release announcing an updated timeline for the Integrated Reporting Framework (IReF) programme, which will harmonise statistical reporting across euro area banks, reduce the reporting burden and enhance the quality of data available to policymakers and analysts. IReF reporting is currently planned to start in the fourth quarter of 2029. A detailed implementation plan is due to be released in late 2025.
Banknotes and coins
Results of the 2024 study on the payment attitudes of consumers
On 5 December 2024 the Governing Council took note of the 2024 study on the payment attitudes of consumers in the euro area (SPACE) and approved its publication on the ECB’s website. This third SPACE study is based on a survey conducted by the ECB between September 2023 and June 2024 in 18 of the 20 euro area countries. The survey data were complemented with harmonised data from national payment surveys carried out by the Deutsche Bundesbank and De Nederlandsche Bank together with the Dutch Payments Association. The study, which will be accompanied by a press release, is scheduled for publication on 19 December 2024. The 
first SPACE study
 was published in 2020. 
ECB Banking Supervision
Results of the asset quality review for J.P. Morgan SE
On 21 November 2024 the Governing Council did not object to the disclosure template, approved by the Supervisory Board, containing the final results of the asset quality review for J.P. Morgan SE, which was conducted by the ECB after the bank was classified as a significant institution. The disclosure template and a related 
press release
 are available on the ECB’s banking supervision website.
Single Supervisory Mechanism (SSM) supervisory priorities for 2025-2027
On 29 November 2024 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish the SSM supervisory priorities for 2025-2027, which detail the strategy of the SSM for the next three years. 
The priorities will be published on 17 December 2024 on the ECB’s banking supervision website.
Disclosure of Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP) methodologies
On 2 December 2024 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish on the ECB’s banking supervision website the revised SREP supervisory methodology web page document, the revised methodologies for credit risk, market risk and internal governance and risk management, as well as new methodologies for interest rate risk in the banking book (IRRBB) and credit spread risk in the banking book (CSRBB) and for operational risk and information and communication technology (ICT) risk. Publication is scheduled on 17 December 2024 on the ECB’s banking supervision website. 
Less significant institution (LSI) supervision report 2024
On 11 December 2024 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish a report on the supervision of LSIs in 2024. The report, which examines the structural features of the LSI sector, its key developments and major supervisory activities, is 
available
 on the ECB’s banking supervision website. 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify