Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Medium to long-term priorities of Capital Markets Union (CMU) for the ECB/Eurosystem

Panel remarks by Yves Mersch, Member of the Executive Board of the ECB, 
at the Eurofi conference in Luxembourg, 10 September 2015

While the Green Paper has set the right overall objectives of CMU and identified priorities for early action and the measures for the medium- to long-term, 
CMU needs to be pursued through a higher level of ambition to achieve greater capital markets development and deeper financial integration. 

1. To bring about its expected benefits, the CMU should foster and result in a high level of financial integration in capital markets across the EU based on an adequate legal and regulatory framework. This would imply more steps towards greater harmonization of 

 bankruptcy law, 

 company law and 

 taxation of financial products 

that pose great political challenges. 

The aim is to ensure that investors have the same costs and equal access to finance irrespective of where they are located in the EU. Ultimately, the supervisory architecture will also warrant revision. The final destination in the path towards CMU will need to include the development of a single rulebook. These elements are key if we are to attain what has been ambitiously coined as CMU.

2. A schedule with clear milestones and deadlines in the upcoming action plan would facilitate implementation. 

3. Market-led initiatives to promote capital markets are important but insufficient. Therefore, legislative action in targeted areas is warranted. While bold action towards the completion of the single rulebook for capital markets will be beneficial, a gradual approach to harmonization could be envisaged in those areas where political sensitivities prevent action at EU level in the short term.

4. Sufficient attention should be devoted to safeguarding financial stability, such as in the area of shadow banking. 

5. A single rulebook for EU capital markets needs to be complemented with strengthened supervisory convergence, delivering a common implementation and enforcement of rules.

6. Further reducing still existing fragmentation in financial market infrastructures should be at the core of CMU. It needs to be recognized that banks will continue to play an important role for the financing of the real economy and in providing access to capital markets.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify