Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Guest commentary on BILD AM SONNTAG

Commentary by Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB
27 December 2009

The economy’s continued gradual recovery in 2010 is dependent on the efforts of all of us. Banks must perform their central role in the supply of credit to the economy. Europe and the rest of the world must learn the lessons from the financial crisis in order to increase the resilience of the financial system. Handling the consequences of the crisis for the labour market and public finances represents an additional challenge. Budget deficits in the euro area must be reduced by 2011 at the latest – in some countries as early as 2010 – in order to maintain confidence in public finances. The European Central Bank, which responded decisively during the crisis, will continue to deliver price stability, being fully faithful to its primary mandate. As has been the case for the last 11 years, the ECB, together with the national central banks, will remain a reliable anchor of stability and confidence. In these difficult times, the euro has proven to the 330 million citizens of the 16 countries of the euro area that they can have confidence in their currency. Confidence is the key word for 2010. 

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify