Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

State celebrations for the introduction of the euro in Slovakia

Statement by Jean-Claude Trichet President of the European Central BankBratislava, 8 January 2009

Dear President, Prime Ministers, Excellencies, Dear Governors,Ladies and Gentlemen,

The introduction of a new currency is an historic moment for a country, and the introduction of the euro in a Member State through the Treaty-based convergence process is an historic moment for Europe. Robert Schuman stated in his founding declaration that Europe will be made through concrete achievements which create tangible solidarity among its people. European monetary union is a concrete achievement, and the euro is a tangible sign of solidarity among its people. The euro is also a tangible sign of increasing economic integration in Europe, which is to the benefit of stability and prosperity for its citizens. Today, with Slovakia’s adoption of the euro, we therefore have every reason to celebrate.

Slovakia’s economic achievements on the way towards euro adoption

Slovakia has made remarkable progress in both nominal and real convergence. This has been reflected in a decline in inflation and a significant economic growth record. Slovakia’s performance is based on the firm foundations of a bold economic reform programme implemented earlier this decade. 

Cooperation between the ECB and Národná banka Slovenska 

On the side of central banks, this historic moment has been prepared through a very close cooperation over the last couple of years between the European Central Bank and Národná banka Slovenska under the leadership of Governor Šramko. This cooperation has laid the groundwork for the smooth and successful introduction of the euro in Slovakia. 

The sustainability of convergence 

The introduction of the euro in Slovakia will further enhance the benefits of the Single Market. The euro removes exchange rate uncertainty between Slovakia and many of its most important trading partners, integrates the country into one of the world’s largest economies and helps to shield it from some of the effects of the international financial turbulence.

It is also important to stress that the introduction of the euro must not give rise to complacency. In order to ensure that convergence is sustainable and that the Slovak people can reap the full benefits of euro adoption, the Slovak public authorities will need to pursue ambitious economic policies on all fronts. A rigorous and credible implementation of fiscal policy in line with the commitments of the Stability and Growth Pact is particularly important. Other policy measures would need to focus on Slovakia’s labour market to improve its functioning and on strengthening further the business environment in order to enhance productivity growth. With such policies, Slovakia should be well positioned for a long term continued successful economic performance. Ladies and gentlemen, let me congratulate you on all the achievements made on the way towards the introduction of the euro in your country, and extend my warmest welcome to Národná banka Slovenska as the new member of the Eurosystem family. Welcome Slovakia!

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Euro changeover in Slovakia

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify