Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)
April 2025
22 April 2025
External communication
ECB Annual Report 2024
On 11 April 2025 the Governing Council adopted the ECB’s Annual Report 2024, which will be presented to the Committee on Economic and Monetary Affairs of the European Parliament and made available on the ECB’s website on 28 April 2025, in 23 of the official languages of the European Union.
Market infrastructure and payments
Status update on the Eurosystem Collateral Management System (ECMS)
On 10 April 2025 the Governing Council took note of a status update on the Eurosystem Collateral Management System (
ECMS
) project. This update comes after the Governing Council’s 
decision 
of October 2024 to reschedule the launch of the ECMS project to 16 June 2025 and its request to be kept regularly informed of the project status. According to the update, which has a cut-off date of the end of February 2025, the project was progressing well towards the go-live date, in line with the agreed project plan, while the results of the testing performed across all ECMS functional domains showed that some challenges remained.
Advice on legislation
ECB Opinion on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 909/2014 as regards a shorter settlement cycle in the Union
On 31 March 2025 the Governing Council adopted Opinion 
CON/2025/7
 at the request of the Council of the European Union and the European Parliament.
ECB Opinion on eliminating or reducing charges imposed by payment service providers
On 31 March 2025 the Governing Council adopted Opinion 
CON/2025/8
 prepared on the ECB’s own initiative.
Corporate governance
ECB Recommendation on the external auditors of Lietuvos bankas
On 4 April 2025 the Governing Council adopted Recommendation 
ECB/2025/11
 to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of Lietuvos bankas. 
ECB Recommendation on the external auditors of Latvijas Banka
On 4 April 2025 the Governing Council adopted Recommendation 
ECB/2025/12
 to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of Latvijas Banka. 
Statistics
Annual update of the list of securities holdings statistics group data reporting agents
On 3 April 2025 the Governing Council approved the updated list of group data reporting agents concerning statistics on holdings of securities. Since 2016 the list has been updated at least once a year on the basis of the quantitative and qualitative criteria set out in Article 2(4) of 
Regulation (EU) No 1011/2012 (ECB/2012/24)
. Entities affected by the changes were notified by the relevant national central bank within ten working days following the date of the Governing Council’s decision, pursuant to Article 8(2) of 
Guideline ECB/2013/7
 (new reporting agents) and for the purposes of Article 2(8) of Regulation (EU) No 1011/2012 (ECB/2012/24) (reporting agents to be removed).
2024 Quality Report on euro area and national quarterly financial accounts
On 17 April 2025 the Governing Council approved the assessment included in the 2024 Quality Report on euro area and national quarterly financial accounts and authorised its publication. This biennial report provides a quality analysis of euro area statistical output, covering the elements of: (i) methodological soundness, (ii) timeliness, (iii) reliability and stability, (iv) internal consistency, and (v) external consistency/coherence with other comparable statistical domains. The report will be available in due course on the ECB’s website.
ECB Banking supervision 
ECB compliance with the European Banking Authority (EBA) Guidelines on internal policies, procedures and controls to ensure the implementation of Union and national restrictive measures
On 11 April 2025 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to notify the EBA that, for the significant institutions under its direct supervision, the ECB intends to comply, by 30 December 2025, with the 
EBA Guidelines
 on internal policies, procedures and controls to ensure the implementation of Union and national restrictive measures (EBA/GL/2024/14 and EBA/GL/2024/15). 
The Guidelines establish common EU standards on the governance arrangements and the policies, procedures and controls financial institutions should have in place to be able to comply with restrictive measures. These standards are designed to mitigate significant differences in the way competent authorities expect financial institutions to comply even though restrictive measures are set at the EU level.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify