Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Statement following the meeting of the Heads of State and Government on 11 February 2010

Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the ECB
11 February 2010

Following the meeting of the Heads of State and Government on 11 February 2010 in Brussels, Jean-Claude Trichet, President of the European Central Bank (ECB), made the following statement: 

I consider the statement of the Heads of State and Government on Greece important in particular as regards the following points: 

The reaffirmation of the necessity for all member states to conduct sound national policies in line with the agreed rules. 

The commitment of the Greek Government to do whatever is necessary, including adopting additional measures to ensure its ambitious targets and in particular the 4 % reduction of the public finance deficit in 2010. 

I confirm that the ECB will work with the European Commission in monitoring the implementation of the recommendations by Greece and will work with the European Commission on proposals for necessary additional measures. One can count on our permanent alertness in this respect. 

I appreciate the commitment of euro area member states to take determined and co-ordinated action, if needed, to safeguard financial stability in the euro area. 

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify