Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Official celebration of the 150th anniversary of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique (National Bank of Belgium)

Speech delivered by Dr. Willem F. Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 12 May 2000

It is a great honour to be invited to speak at this official celebration of the 150th anniversary of the National Bank of Belgium (the Bank). Before I say anything else, let me first congratulate the Bank on reaching this milestone in its history and allow me to congratulate in particular all those whose work and dedication have ensured its place as a successful and well respected central bank. 

As we have heard from Prime Minister Verhofstadt, the Bank enjoys a rich and extensive history, which dates back almost as far as the state of Belgium itself and during which time it has contributed greatly to the development of the Belgian economy. It is also a time in which the tasks and responsibilities of central banks have evolved to such an extent that they bear little resemblance to those of a century and half ago. 

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify