Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Introductory statement

at High Level Forumdelivered by Dr.Willem F. Duisenberg, President of the European Central Bank, Brussels, 15 June 2000

Let me first welcome the opportunity to share some thoughts with you today on the outcome of the special Lisbon European Council meeting and on how to implement what has come to be known as the "Lisbon strategy". This is quite an exceptional occasion and I very much hope that, as a result of our discussion today, we shall all gain some further insight into how we might each contribute towards meeting the challenges facing the European economy. 

The Lisbon European Council set the goal of creating a competitive, dynamic and knowledge-based economy. This should be an economy which is capable of embracing the changes brought about by the development of new technologies and globalisation. As a result, it should be able to deliver a high level of sustainable, employment-generating growth for the benefit of all members of society. 

In order to achieve this goal, the Lisbon European Council has devised a comprehensive strategy, which combines stability-oriented macroeconomic policies with enhanced economic reform and the modernisation of our social protection systems. Implementing this strategy will certainly require all relevant actors to play their part. 

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify