Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

June 2009

Operational issues

Technical modalities of the purchase programme for covered bonds

On 4 June 2009 the Governing Council decided upon the technical modalities of the purchase programme of euro-denominated covered bonds which it had approved in principle at its 7 May 2009 meeting. A press release specifying the modalities of this programme was published on 4 June 2009 on the ECB’s website. 

Indicative calendars for the Eurosystem’s regular tender operations and reserve maintenance periods 

On 28 May 2009 the Governing Council approved the indicative calendars for the Eurosystem’s regular tender operations and reserve maintenance periods for 2010 and 2011. Details are provided in two press releases published on the ECB’s website on 29 May 2009 in all official Community languages.

Amendment to the ECB Guideline on reserve management services

On 28 May 2009 the Governing Council adopted a Guideline amending Guideline ECB/2006/4 on the Eurosystem’s provision of reserve management services in euro to central banks and countries located outside the euro area and to international organisations (ECB/2009/11). The amendments relate to (a) the definition of “reserves” to reflect the replacement of the two-tier system by the single framework for eligible collateral common to all Eurosystem credit operations; and (b) the list of Eurosystem reserve management services which now includes fixed-term deposit services on a principal basis. The Guideline was published in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 on 5 June 2009 and is available on the ECB’s website. 

Payment systems and market infrastructure

ESCB/CESR recommendations for securities settlement systems and central counterparties

On 22 May 2009 the Governing Council approved the ESCB/CESR Recommendations for securities settlement systems and central counterparties (CCPs). The Governing Council also approved the feedback document in response to comments received in the course of the relevant public consultations. Both documents, which have been communicated to the European Commission, the ECOFIN Council and the European Parliament, are being published on the websites of the ESCB. 

Financial stability and supervision

Systemic impact assessment framework

On 18 June 2009 the Governing Council took note of a report, prepared by the Banking Supervision Committee, on the status of implementation, as at February 2009, of the common analytical framework for assessing the systemic impact of a financial crisis which, in accordance with the ECOFIN Council conclusions of 9 October 2007, should have been in place in all Member States by the end of 2008. The Governing Council authorised the subsequent transmission of the report to the relevant European authorities. 

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on Banca Naţională a României and financial stability measures

On 27 May 2009, at the request of Banca Naţională a României, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on strengthening Banca Naţională a României’s remedial powers in relation to credit institutions in distress (CON/2009/48). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Slovak financial stability legislation

On 27 May 2009, at the request of the Slovak Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on measures to mitigate financial turmoil (CON/2009/49). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on financial supervision in Germany

On 2 June 2009, at the request of the German Federal Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on new measures strengthening financial supervision (CON/2009/50). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the Romanian deposit guarantee scheme

On 5 June 2009, at the request of Banca Naţională a României, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on measures to increase the effectiveness of the deposit-guarantee scheme (CON/2009/51). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Czech legislation related to the circulation of banknotes and coins

On 18 June 2009, at the request of Česká národní banka, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the circulation of banknotes and coins (CON/2009/52). The Opinion will be published shortly on the ECB’s website.

Corporate governance

Chairmanship of the International Relations Committee (IRC)

On 4 June 2009 the Governing Council appointed Mr Ignazio Visco, Deputy Director General of the Banca d’Italia, as Chairman of the IRC with immediate effect. His term as IRC Chairman will expire on 31 August 2010, so as to coincide with the expiry of the terms of office of all the other Eurosystem/ESCB committee chairpersons, who were (re-)appointed by the Governing Council on 19 July 2007 for a three-year period.

ECB Recommendation on the external auditors of Banka Slovenije

On 5 June 2009 the Governing Council adopted a Recommendation to the EU Council on the external auditors of Banka Slovenije (ECB/2009/12). The Recommendation was published in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 on 11 June 2009 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Purchase programme for covered bonds

Publication of the indicative calendars for the Eurosystem’s regular tender operations in 2010 and 2011 [en]

Publication of the indicative calendars for the reserve maintenance periods in 2010 and 2011 [en]

ECB/2009/11

Advice on legislation

CON/2009/48

CON/2009/49

CON/2009/50

CON/2009/51

Corporate governance

ECB/2009/12

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify