Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

September 2009

Payment systems and market infrastructure

Report on the assessment of securities settlement systems, direct links and relayed links

On 7 August 2009 the Governing Council approved a report on the assessment of all securities settlement systems (SSSs) and the links that are currently being used for the collateralisation of Eurosystem credit operations. A press release and updated lists of the SSSs, direct links and relayed links that are eligible for use in Eurosystem credit operations were published on the ECB’s website on 14 August 2009. 

Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission’s consultation on enhancing the resilience of over-the-counter derivatives markets

On 3 September 2009 the Governing Council approved the Eurosystem’s contribution to the European Commission’s consultation on possible initiatives to enhance the resilience of over-the-counter (OTC) derivatives markets. The Eurosystem’s contribution was published on the ECB’s website on 4 September 2009. 

Code of Conduct of the TARGET2-Securities Programme Board

On 17 September 2009 the Governing Council approved the Code of Conduct of the TARGET2-Securities (T2S) Programme Board and authorised its publication on the ECB’s website as well as the publication of the Rules of Procedures of the T2S Programme Board. 

Update of the TARGET2 Guideline 

On 17 September 2009 the Governing Council adopted a Guideline amending Guideline ECB/2007/2 on a Trans-European Automated Real-time Gross settlement Express Transfer system (TARGET2) (ECB/2009/21). The changes mainly relate to the new release of the Single Shared Platform (SSP) which will go live on 23 November 2009 and clarify the specific oversight location principles that entities offering services in euro are required to comply with. The Guideline will be published shortly in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 and on the ECB’s website. 

Financial stability and supervision

Credit default swaps and counterparty risk

On 27 August 2009 the Governing Council authorised the publication of a report, prepared by the Banking Supervision Committee (BSC), on credit default swaps (CDS) and counterparty risk. First, the report details the main features of the CDS market in the EU that warrant attention from a financial stability point of view. It then goes on to provide an assessment, at the EU level, of the sources of counterparty risk and the associated challenges. Finally, it provides an overview of the regulatory and market initiatives under way to address the identified weaknesses. The report was published on the ECB’s website on 28 August 2009.

EU banking sector stability 

On 27 August 2009 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the report entitled “EU Banking Sector Stability”, as prepared by the BSC. The report examines the financial condition of the entire EU banking system in 2008 and of large EU banks in the first quarter of 2009. It also analyses the main risks surrounding the outlook for the EU banking sector, drawing on a wide range of macro-prudential and market indicators. The report was published on the ECB’s website on 28 August 2009.

Advice on legislation 

ECB Opinion on strengthening bank resolution techniques in Latvia

On 10 August 2009, at the request of the Latvian Financial and Capital Market Commission, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on strengthening bank resolution techniques (CON/2009/65). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on amending the Finnish legal framework for clearing operations

On 7 August 2009, at the request of the Finnish Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on amending the legal framework for clearing operations (CON/2009/66). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on an extension to Narodowy Bank Polski’s entitlement to trade in securities

On 20 August 2009, at the request of the Polish Minister for Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on an extension to Narodowy Bank Polski’s entitlement to trade in securities (CON/2009/67). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the establishment of the Irish National Asset Management Agency

On 31 August 2009, at the request of the Irish Minister for Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the establishment of the National Asset Management Agency (CON/2009/68). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the remuneration of the Treasury availability account held with the Banca d'Italia

On 1 September 2009, at the request of the Italian Ministry of Economic Affairs and Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the remuneration of the Treasury availability account held with the Banca d'Italia (CON/2009/69). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on money laundering and terrorist financing prevention provisions relating to the Banco de España 

On 14 September 2009, at the request of the Spanish State Secretary for Economic Affairs, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on money laundering and terrorist financing prevention provisions relating to the Banco de España (CON/2009/70). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website. 

ECB Opinion on Česká národní banka’s supervisory tasks relating to consumer credit 

On 14 September 2009, at the request of the Czech Ministry of Industry and Trade, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on Česká národní banka’s supervisory tasks relating to consumer credit (CON/2009/71). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on payment services in Romania

On 15 September 2009, at the request of the Romanian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on payment services (CON/2009/72). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

International and European cooperation

Central banks’ renewed agreement on gold sales

On 7 August 2009 the ECB and the 16 national central banks of the euro area, in cooperation with Sveriges Riksbank and the Swiss National Bank, issued a joint statement whereby they committed to achieve the gold sales already decided or to be decided through a concerted programme of sales over a period of five years, starting on 27 September 2009. This renewed agreement immediately follows on from the previous five-year agreement that took effect on 27 September 2004. The press release is available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Payment systems and market infrastructure

Assessment of securities settlement systems, direct links and relayed links

Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission’s consultation on enhancing the resilience of over-the-counter derivatives markets
  
   T2S Programme Board Code of Conduct  
   T2S Programme Board Rules of Procedures  
  

Financial stability and supervision

Report on credit default swaps and counterparty risk [pdf]

Report on EU banking sector stability [pdf]

Advice on legislation

CON/2009/65

CON/2009/66

CON/2009/67

CON/2009/68

CON/2009/69

CON/2009/70

CON/2009/71

CON/2009/72

International and European Cooperation

Central banks’ renewed agreement on gold sales

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify