Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

November 2009

Operational issues

Rating requirements for asset-backed securities in Eurosystem credit operations

The Governing Council has decided to amend the rating requirements for asset-backed securities (ABSs). The Eurosystem will require at least two ratings from accepted external credit assessment institutions for all ABSs issued as of 1 March 2010. In determining the eligibility of these ABSs, the Eurosystem will apply the “second-best” rule, meaning that not only the best, but also the second-best available rating must comply with the minimum threshold applicable to ABSs (for further details, see the press release of 20 January 2009). As of 1 March 2011, the second-best rule and the requirement to have at least two ratings will be applied to all ABSs, regardless of their date of issue. A press release on this subject was published today on the ECB’s website.

Payment systems and market infrastructure

Eurosystem Oversight Report 2009 

On 30 October 2009 the Governing Council approved the first Eurosystem Oversight Report, which seeks to inform public authorities, market infrastructure providers and their participants, as well as the general public, on the performance of the Eurosystem’s oversight function and the Eurosystem’s assessment of the safety and soundness of euro area payment, clearing and settlement infrastructures. The aim is to raise awareness regarding developments in these infrastructures and the Eurosystem’s role in monitoring such developments and addressing potential risks and inefficiencies. The report was published on the ECB’s website on 12 November 2009.

Financial stability and supervision

Financial Stability Review – December 2009

On 19 November 2009 the Governing Council authorised the publication of the “Financial Stability Review – December 2009”. The review provides a comprehensive assessment of the capacity of the euro area financial system to absorb adverse disturbances and examines the main sources of risk to and vulnerabilities of financial system stability. The review will be published on the ECB’s website by mid-December 2009.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on the extension of Polish Treasury support to financial institutions

On 23 October 2009, at the request of the Polish Minister for Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on an extension of the State Treasury support to financial institutions (CON/2009/82). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the distribution of Lietuvos bankas’s profits

On 14 October 2009, at the request of the Lithuanian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the distribution of Lietuvos bankas’s profits (CON/2009/83). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on supervision by De Nederlandsche Bank of clearing and settlement services

On 26 October 2009, on its own initiative, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on supervision by De Nederlandsche Bank of clearing and settlement services (CON/2009/84). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Národná banka Slovenska’s independence

On 27 October 2009, at the request of the National Council of the Slovak Republic, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on Národná banka Slovenska’s independence (CON/2009/85). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Austrian measures to improve liquidity and increase the competitiveness of credit institutions

On 28 October 2009, at the request of the Austrian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on measures to improve liquidity and increase the competitiveness of credit institutions (CON/2009/86). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on extending the deadline for submitting certain banknotes to be exchanged in Hungary

On 29 October 2009, at the request of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on extending the deadline for submitting certain banknotes to be exchanged (CON/2009/87). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Community legislation related to macro-prudential oversight of the financial system and the establishment and functioning of the European Systemic Risk Board

On 26 October 2009, at the request of the Council of the European Union, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on Community macro-prudential oversight of the financial system and establishing a European Systemic Risk Board and a proposal for a Council decision entrusting the ECB with specific tasks concerning the functioning of the European Systemic Risk Board (CON/2009/88). The Opinion was published in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 on 11 November 2009 and is also available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the composition of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland’s Board and membership of the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority

On 4 November 2009, at the request of the Irish Minister for Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the composition of the Board of the Central Bank and Financial Services Authority of Ireland and the membership of the Irish Financial Services Regulatory Authority (CON/2009/89). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the ranking of the lien of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique

On 4 November 2009, at the request of the Belgian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the ranking of the lien of the Nationale Bank van België/Banque Nationale de Belgique (CON/2009/90). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the Community’s position in relation to monetary agreements with the Vatican City State and with the Republic of San Marino

On 5 November 2009, at the request of the Council of the European Union, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on recommendations for Council decisions on the position to be taken by the European Community regarding the renegotiation of the monetary agreement with the Vatican City State and on the position to be taken by the European Community regarding the renegotiation of the monetary agreement with the Republic of San Marino (CON/2009/91). The English version of the Opinion is available on the ECB’s website. The Opinion will be published shortly in all language versions in the 
Official Journal of the EU 
and on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Lithuanian rules implementing the law on financial stability 

On 12 November 2009, at the request of the Lithuanian Ministry of Finance, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on conditions and procedures for the application of the measures to strengthen financial stability (CON/2009/93). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Community legislation on capital requirements

On 12 November 2009, at the request of the Council of the European Union, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a proposal for a directive of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Directives 2006/48/EC and 2006/49/EC as regards capital requirements for the trading book and for re-securitisations, and the supervisory review of remuneration policies (CON/2009/94). The Opinion will be published shortly in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 and on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on Community legislation on the authentication of euro coins and handling of euro coins unfit for circulation

On 16 November 2009, at the request of the Council of the European Union, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on a proposal for a Council regulation concerning authentication of euro coins and handling of euro coins unfit for circulation (CON/2009/95). The Opinion will be published shortly in the 
Official Journal of the EU
 and on the ECB’s website.

ECB Opinion on the realisation of collateral provided to the Banco de España

On 16 November 2009, at the request of Spanish State Secretary for Economic Affairs, the Governing Council adopted an Opinion on the realisation of collateral provided to the Banco de España, to other national central banks of the Member States or to the European Central Bank in the performance of their tasks (CON/2009/96). The Opinion is available on the ECB’s website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Operational issues

Rating requirements for asset-backed securities in Eurosystem credit operations

Payment systems and market infrastructure

Eurosystem oversight report 2009

Advice on legislation

CON/2009/82

CON/2009/83

CON/2009/84

CON/2009/85

CON/2009/86

CON/2009/87

CON/2009/88

CON/2009/89

CON/2009/90

CON/2009/91

CON/2009/93

CON/2009/96

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify