Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

February 2016

EMBARGO
TRANSMISSION EMBARGO until 3 p.m. CET on 19 February 2016

 External communication

 
Publication of the Agreement on Net Financial Assets

On 3 February 2016 the governors of the national central banks (NCBs) of the euro area, signatories to the Agreement on Net Financial Assets, approved the publication in full of that Agreement. Publication of an extended questions and answers document (Q&A) was approved on 5 February 2016 by the Governing Council. The Q&A, which explains the nature, purpose and technicalities of the Agreement, is available on the ECB’s website in 23 languages, together with the Agreement, which is available only in English. The Governing Council also decided to publish the Eurosystem’s aggregate net financial assets (NFA), and each NCB will publish its respective NFA on an annual basis when it publishes its annual financial accounts.

 Financial stability

 
Call for evidence on EU regulatory framework for financial services

On 3 February 2016 the Governing Council approved a Eurosystem reply to the European Commission’s call for evidence on the EU regulatory framework for financial services, which was subsequently sent to the European Commission. The Eurosystem response is available on the ECB’s website.

 Payment systems and market infrastructure

 
Update of the Eurosystem oversight framework for retail payments systems

On 5 February 2016 the Governing Council approved amendments to the Eurosystem oversight policy framework for retail payment systems. The updated document is available on the ECB’s website.

 Advice on legislation

 
ECB Opinion on safeguarding the redemption of coins by the Austrian Mint

On 25 January 2016 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2016/4 at the request of the Austrian Ministry of Finance.

 
ECB Opinion on the recovery and resolution of credit institutions and investment firms in Cyprus 

On 1 February 2016 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2016/5 at the request of the Cypriot Ministry of Finance.

 
ECB Opinion on the deposit guarantee scheme in Slovenia

On 3 February 2016 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2016/6 at the request of the Slovenian Ministry of Finance.

 Corporate governance

 
Appointment to the Administrative Board of Review

On 3 February 2016 the Governing Council adopted a decision appointing Mr Ivan Šramko as an alternate member of the Administrative Board of Review for a term of five years, after the procedure provided for under Article 4(2) of Decision ECB/2014/16 of the European Central Bank of 14 April 2014 concerning the establishment of an Administrative Board of Review and its Operating Rules had been followed. The Administrative Board of Review carries out, at the request of any legal or natural person directly affected by an ECB supervisory decision, internal administrative reviews of those decisions, ensuring that they comply with all relevant rules and procedures.

 
ECB’s Annual Accounts 2015

On 17 February 2016 the Governing Council approved the audited Annual Accounts of the ECB for the financial year 2015. The Annual Accounts, together with a related press release, were published on the ECB’s website on 18 February 2016. The related management report for the year 2015 was published along with the ECB’s Annual Accounts.

 Banking supervision

 
Public consultation on the Institutional Protection Schemes (IPSs)

On 11 February 2016 the Governing Council endorsed the launch of a public consultation on assessing the eligibility of IPSs. The consultation period starts on 19 February 2016 and ends on 15 April 2016. The draft ECB Guide on the approach for the recognition of IPSs for prudential purposes is available on the ECB’s website. A related press release, together with the relevant documentation, was published today on the ECB’s website. 

 
Publication of SREP methodology booklet

On 12 February 2016 the Governing Council approved the publication of the “SSM SREP Methodology Booklet”. The booklet is available on the ECB website.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

External communication

05/02/2016 - Press release: ECB explains the Agreement on Net Financial Assets

Financial stability

Eurosystem contribution to the European Commission's call for evidence on the EU regulatory framework for financial services

Payment systems and market infrastructure

Revised oversight framework for retail payment systems

Advice on legislation

CON/2016/4 

CON/2016/5 

CON/2016/6 

Corporate Governance

Appointment to the Administrative Board of Review

Annual Accounts 2015

Banking supervision

Public consultations

SSM SREP Methodology Booklet

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify