Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

November 2018

Market operations

Amendment of the list of agencies eligible for participation in the public sector purchase programme

On 15 November 2018 the Governing Council approved an amendment to the initial list of agencies located in the euro area issuing securities that are eligible for the public sector purchase programme. The list is available on the ECB’s website.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on the legal framework of the State Audit Office in Croatia

On 26 October 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/45 at the request of the Ministry of Finance of the Republic of Croatia.

ECB Opinion on the review of Finnish law concerning preparedness obligations applicable in the financial sector

On 26 October 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/46 at the request of the Finnish Ministry of Finance.

ECB Opinion on designation of essential services and operators of essential services for the purpose of network and information systems security in Slovenia

On 8 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/47 at the request of the Slovenian Ministry of Public Administration.

ECB Opinion on the minimum reserve requirements of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank

On 8 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/48 at the request of the Magyar Nemzeti Bank.

ECB Opinion on national legislation to be adopted for the purpose of establishing close cooperation between the European Central Bank and Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National Bank)

On 9 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/49 at the request of the Bulgarian Minister for Finance.

ECB Opinion on the strengthening of financial supervision and investor protection in Poland

On 9 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/50 at the request of the Polish Parliament.

ECB Opinion on a proposal for a regulation on the establishment of a European Investment Stabilisation Function

On 9 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/51 at the request of the European Parliament.

ECB Opinion on the macroprudential mandate of Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National Bank) and the governance of credit institutions

On 19 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/52 at the request of the Bulgarian Minister for Finance.

ECB Opinion on the implementation of the recommendations of the convergence report into the Law on Българска народна банка (Bulgarian National Bank)

On 16 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/53 at the request of the Bulgarian Minister for Finance.

ECB Opinion on a proposal for a Directive on credit servicers, credit purchasers and the recovery of collateral

On 20 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/54 at the initiative of the ECB.

Corporate governance

Chairmanship of the ECB Audit Committee

Mr Ewald Nowotny, member of the Governing Council of the ECB, will assume the function of Chairman of the ECB Audit Committee until the end of his term as Governor of the Oesterreichische Nationalbank in August 2019. In this role, Mr Nowotny succeeds Mr Liikanen, former Governor of Suomen Pankki – Finlands Bank, who retired in July 2018.

Banking supervision

ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process and ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process 

On 7 November 2018 the Governing Council did not object to the proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish the ECB Guide to the internal capital adequacy assessment process (ICAAP) and ECB Guide to the internal liquidity adequacy assessment process (ILAAP). The guides have been published on the ECB’s banking supervision website on 9 November 2018. 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify