Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

January 2018

Advice on legislation 

ECB Opinion on a proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council on European business statistics amending Regulation (EC) No 184/2005 and repealing 10 legal acts in the field of business statistics

On 2 January 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/1 at the request of the Council of the European Union.

ECB Opinion on markets in financial instruments in Greece

On 9 January 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/2 at the request of the Greek Ministry of Finance.

ECB Opinion on markets in financial instruments
 
in Slovenia

On 11 January 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/3 at the request of the Slovenian Ministry of Finance.

Corporate governance

ECB Recommendation to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of the European Central Bank

On 15 December 2017 the Governing Council adopted Recommendation ECB/2017/42 to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of the European Central Bank. The Recommendation has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union and on the ECB’s website.
 

ECB Recommendation to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of the Central Bank of Cyprus.

On 19 December 2017 the Governing Council adopted Recommendation ECB/2017/43 to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of the Central Bank of Cyprus. The Recommendation has been published in the Official Journal of the European Union and on the ECB’s website.
 

Chair of the Committee on Controlling

On 9 January 2018 the Governing Council appointed Mr Denis Beau, Deputy Governor of the Banque de France, as the Chair of the Eurosystem/ESCB Committee on Controlling (COMCO). The appointment takes place with immediate effect and until 31 December 2019, so as to coincide with the expiry of the terms of office of the other Eurosystem/ESCB committee chairpersons.

Chair of the Financial Stability Committee

On 25 January 2018 the Governing Council appointed Mr Sergio Nicoletti Altimari, Director General of the ECB’s Directorate General Macroprudential Policy and Financial Stability, as the Chair of the Eurosystem/ESCB Financial Stability Committee (FSC). The appointment takes place with effect from 1 February 2018 until 31 December 2019, so as to coincide with the expiry of the terms of office of the other Eurosystem/ESCB committee chairpersons.

Chair of the Internal Auditors Committee

On 25 January 2018 the Governing Council appointed Ms Claudia Mann, appointed Director of the ECB’s Directorate Internal Audit as from 1 March 2018, as the Chair of the Eurosystem/ESCB Internal Auditors Committee (IAC) from that date. The appointment takes place until 31 December 2019, so as to coincide with the expiry of the terms of office of the other Eurosystem/ESCB committee chairpersons.

Banking supervision

Compliance with EBA Guidelines regarding the supervision of significant institutions

On 27 December 2017 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to notify the European Banking Authority (EBA) that, in relation to the significant institutions under its direct supervision, the ECB will comply by 1 January 2021 with the EBA Guidelines on the application of the definition of default under Article 178 of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 (EBA/GL/2016/07). These Guidelines, which will apply from that date, aim to harmonise the application of the provisions concerning defaulted exposures of Regulation (EU) No 575/2013 across the European prudential framework.

ECB Recommendation on dividend distribution policies

On 28 December 2017 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to adopt Recommendation ECB/2017/44 on dividend distribution policies. The Recommendation, which is available on the ECB’s banking supervision website, is addressed to significant supervised entities and significant supervised groups, as well as to the national competent authorities and designated authorities which are expected to apply it to less significant supervised entities and less significant supervised groups as deemed appropriate.

Supervisory Examination Programme of on-site inspections and internal model investigations for 2018 

On 2 January 2018 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to approve adjustments to the 2018 Supervisory Examination Programme (SEP) of on-site inspections (OSIs) and internal model investigations (IMIs) for significant institutions within the SSM.

Compliance with EBA Guidelines on ICT risk assessment under the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP)

On 4 January 2018 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to notify the European Banking Authority (EBA) that, for significant credit institutions under its supervision, the ECB intends to comply with the EBA Guidelines on information and communication technology (ICT) risk assessment under the Supervisory Review and Evaluation Process (SREP) from January 2018 (EBA/GL/2017/05).

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Advice on legislation

CON/2018/1

CON/2018/2

CON/2018/3

Corporate governance

ECB/2017/42

ECB/2017/43

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify