Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

July 2018

Market operations

Indicative calendars for the Eurosystem’s regular tender operations and reserve maintenance periods 

On 5 July 2018 the Governing Council approved the indicative calendars for the Eurosystem’s regular tender operations and reserve maintenance periods for 2019. Details were provided in a related press release published on the ECB’s website on 11 July 2018. 

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on the regulation of the business of owning credit agreements in Ireland

On 5 July 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/31 at the request of the Chairman of the Oireachtas (the Irish National Parliament) Joint Committee on Finance, Public Expenditure and Reform and the Taoiseach (the Irish Prime Minister).

ECB Opinion on a proposal for a regulation on minimum loss coverage for non-performing exposures 

On 12 July 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/32 at the request of the European Parliament and the Council of the European Union.

ECB Opinion on a proposal for a regulation on the law applicable to third-party effects of assignments of claims

On 18/07/2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/33. 

Corporate governance

ECB Recommendation to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of Banka Slovenije
 

On 6 July 2018 the Governing Council adopted Recommendation ECB/2018/18 to the Council of the European Union on the external auditors of Banka Slovenije. The Recommendation will be published in the Official Journal of the European Union and on the ECB’s website. 

Banking supervision

Publication of the ECB report on recovery plans

On 29 June 2018 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish the ECB report on recovery plans. The report is available on the ECB’s banking supervision website.

Announcement of further steps in the supervisory approach to the stock of NPLs in the euro area

On 6 July 2018 the Governing Council did not object to a proposal by the Supervisory Board regarding further steps in the supervisory approach for addressing the stock of non-performing loans (NPLs) in the euro area. The approach follows the work that has already been undertaken in this area, namely the banks’ NPL reduction strategies, and the addendum for provisioning for new NPLs. It creates a consistent framework to address the stock of NPLs as part of the supervisory dialogue through bank-specific supervisory expectations aimed at achieving adequate provisioning of legacy NPLs thereby contributing to the resilience of the euro area banking system as a whole. More information is available on the ECB’s banking supervision website.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Market operations

ECB publishes indicative calendars for the Eurosystem’s regular tender operations and reserve maintenance periods in 2019

Advice on legislation

CON/2018/31

CON/2018/32

CON/2018/33

Banking supervision

Report on recovery plans

ECB announces further steps in supervisory approach to stock of NPLs

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify