Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

December 2018

Market operations

Acceptance of the revised credit assessment system of the Banco de España for use within the Eurosystem Credit Assessment Framework

On 7 December 2018 the Governing Council decided to accept the in-house credit assessment system (ICAS) of the Banco de España for use within the Eurosystem Credit Assessment Framework (ECAF). The full list of ICASs, as well as more detailed information on the ECAF, is available on the ECB’s website.

Market infrastructure and payments

Closure report on the UNITAS crisis communication exercise 

On 29 November 2018 the Governing Council approved the closure report on the UNITAS market-wide crisis communication exercise performed on 28 June 2018 with European financial infrastructures and central bank overseers based on a scenario of a cyberattack. A high-level summary of the exercise will be published on the ECB’s website.

Cyber Resilience Oversight Expectations

On 29 November 2018 the Governing Council approved the final Cyber Resilience Oversight Expectations for financial market infrastructures. The document defining the Eurosystem’s expectations in terms of cyber resilience, together with the relevant documentation, was published on the ECB’s website on 3 December 2018.

Threat Intelligence-based Ethical Red Teaming (TIBER-EU) Framework White Team Guidance

On 13 December 2018 the Governing Council approved the TIBER-EU White Team Guidance. The Guidance is an integral part of the TIBER-EU Framework and provides further guidance about the roles and responsibilities of the White Team, which is the team, within the entity being tested, that is responsible for the overall planning and management of the test. The Guidance is available on the ECB’s website.

Advice on legislation

ECB Opinion on an amended proposal for a regulation of the European Parliament and of the Council amending Regulation (EU) No 1093/2010 establishing a European Supervisory Authority (European Banking Authority) and related legal acts

On 7 December 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/55 at the request of the European Parliament and of the Council of the European Union.

ECB Opinion on amendments to the liability regime concerning the Board members and employees of Banca Naţională a României

On 11 December 2018 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2018/56 at the request of the Romanian Senate.

Statistics

Regulation concerning statistics on money markets

On 7 December 2018 the Governing Council adopted Regulation ECB/2018/33 amending Regulation ECB/2014/48 concerning statistics on money markets. The Regulation will be published in the Official Journal of the European Union and on the ECB’s website.

Corporate governance

ECB's capital - quinquennial adjustment of the subscription key

On 29 November 2018 the Governing Council adopted (i) Decision ECB/2018/27 on the national central banks' percentage shares in the key for subscription to the European Central Bank's capital and repealing Decision ECB/2013/28; (ii) Decision ECB/2018/28 on the paying-up of the European Central Bank's capital by the national central banks of Member States whose currency is the euro, amending Decision ECB/2014/61 and repealing Decision ECB/2013/30; (iii) Decision ECB/2018/29 laying down the terms and conditions for transfers of the European Central Bank's capital shares between the national central banks and for the adjustment of the paid-up capital and repealing Decision ECB/2013/29; (iv) Decision ECB/2018/30 laying down the measures necessary for the contribution to the European Central Bank's accumulated equity value and for adjusting the national central banks' claims equivalent to the transferred foreign reserve assets and repealing Decision ECB/2013/26; and (v) Decision ECB/2018/31 amending Decision ECB/2010/29 on the issue of euro banknotes. On 30 November 2018 the General Council adopted Decision ECB/2018/32 on the paying-up of the European Central Bank's capital by the non-euro area national central banks and repealing Decision ECB/2013/31. The Decisions, which reflect the quinquennial review of the ECB’s capital key have been published in English on the ECB’s website and will be published in due course in the Official Journal of the European Union. 

New member of the ECB Ethics Committee 

On 5 December 2018 the Governing Council appointed Mr Erkki Liikanen as a member of the ECB Ethics Committee in succession to Mr Klaus Liebscher as of 1 January 2019.

Banking supervision

Statement on SSM risk appetite 

On 7 December 2018 the Governing Council did not object to the proposal by the Supervisory Board to publish the statement on SSM risk appetite. The statement was published on the ECB’s banking supervision website on 10 December 2018.

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

Market operations

Eurosystem credit assessment framework (ECAF)

Payment systems and market infrastructure

UNITAS Crisis communication exercise report

ECB publishes the cyber resilience oversight expectations

Advice on legislation

CON/2018/55

CON/2018/56

Corporate governance

Capital of the ECB

Banking supervision

Statement on SSM risk appetite

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify