Skip to:

Skip to 
navigation

Skip to 
content

Skip to 
footer

ANYTIME 

PAST MONTH 

PAST YEAR 

Search Options

Image Preview

Home

Media

Explainers

Research & Publications

Statistics

Monetary Policy

The €uro

Payments & Markets

Careers

Suggestions

Sort by

Relevance
                                

Date
                                

 

Decisions taken by the Governing Council of the ECB (in addition to decisions setting interest rates)

July 2015

EMBARGO
TRANSMISSION EMBARGO until 3 p.m. CET on 17 July 2015

 External communication

 
Ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Union on the Outright Monetary Transactions

On 18 June 2015 the Governing Council took note of the ruling of the Court of Justice of the European Union (ECJ) which confirmed that the Outright Monetary Transactions (OMT) programme announced in 2012 was compatible with EU law and within the ECB’s competences. A related press release is available on the ECB’s website.

 Market operations 

 
Tender operations and maintenance periods in 2016

On 18 June 2015 the Governing Council took note of the indicative calendars for the Eurosystem’s regular tender operations and for the reserve maintenance periods in 2016. Details are provided in two press releases in 23 official EU languages, which were published on the ECB’s website on 22 June 2015.

 
Specification of technical aspects of the targeted longer-term refinancing operations

On 25 June 2015 the Governing Council approved technical aspects of relevance to the conduct of the targeted longer-term refinancing operations (TLTROs), in particular those relating to the impact of data revisions on the calculation of the initial and additional allowance. 

 
Enhancement of transparency requirements for asset-backed securities

On 25 June 2015 the Governing Council decided to reduce the tolerance levels for legacy IT systems and for legacy assets in the context of loan-level data requirements for asset-backed securities (ABSs), following an adaptation period of one year. Further information on these changes is available on the ECB’s website. 

 
Guiding principles of Eurosystem-preferred eligible ABSs for the ABS purchase programme

On 1 July 2015 the Governing Council decided to publish a set of guiding principles in order to illustrate the Eurosystem’s preferences with regard to the ABSs that it considers for purchase in the context of the ABS purchase programme. The aim is to provide market participants with greater clarity. These principles are available on the ECB’s website. 

 
Provision of emergency liquidity assistance by the Bank of Greece

On 6 July 2015 the Governing Council announced its decision to maintain the provision of emergency liquidity assistance (ELA) by the Bank of Greece to Greek banks at the level decided on 26 June 2015 and to adjust the haircuts applied to collateral accepted by the Bank of Greece for ELA. A related press release is available on the ECB’s website.

 Payment systems and market infrastructure

 
Fourth report on card fraud

On 9 July 2015 the Governing Council took note of the “Fourth report on card fraud”, prepared by the Payment and Settlement Systems Committee, and authorised its publication on the ECB’s website. The report, which is available on the ECB’s website, analyses trends and patterns in card fraud within the Single Euro Payments Area and covers the period 2009-13. 

 Advice on legislation

 
ECB Opinion on a central credit register in Malta

On 19 June 2015 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2015/20 at the request of the Central Bank of Malta.

 
ECB Opinion on consumer protection in the financial markets in Slovakia

On 1 July 2015 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2015/21 at the request of the Slovak Ministry of Finance.

 
ECB Opinion on recovery and resolution in the financial market in the Czech Republic

On 1 July 2015 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2015/22 at the request of the Czech Ministry of Finance.

 
ECB Opinion on new legal framework for savings banks in Portugal

On 7 July 2015 the Governing Council adopted Opinion CON/2015/23 at the request of the Portuguese Ministry of Finance.

 

CONTACT

European Central Bank

Directorate General Communications

Sonnemannstrasse 20

60314 Frankfurt am Main, Germany

+49 69 1344 7455

media@ecb.europa.eu

Reproduction is permitted provided that the source is acknowledged.

Media contacts

  SEE ALSO
 

Find out more about related content

External communication

ECB Governing Council takes note of ruling on OMT

Market operations

Indicative calendar for the Eurosystem’s regular tender operations in 2016 [en]

Indicative calendar for the reserve maintenance periods in 2016 [en]

ABS loan-level initiative

Guiding principles of Eurosystem-preferred eligible ABSs for the ABS purchase programme

Provision of emergency liquidity assistance by the Bank of Greece [en]

Payment systems

ECB report on card fraud

Advice on legislation

CON/2015/20

CON/2015/21

CON/2015/22

CON/2015/23

Are you happy with this page?

Yes

No

What made you unhappy?

Page not working

Information not useful

Design not attractive

Something else

Thank you for letting us know!

 

Our website uses cookies

We use functional cookies to store user preferences; analytics cookies to improve website performance; third-party cookies set by third-party services integrated into the website. You have the choice to accept or reject them. For more information or to review your preference on the cookies and server logs we use, we invite you to:

Read our privacy statement 
 
Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Thank you!

Thank you!

We have updated our privacy policy

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

See what has changed in our privacy policy

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

Your cookie preference has expired

We are always working to improve this website for our users. To do this, we use the anonymous data provided
			by cookies.

Learn more about how we use cookies

I understand and I accept the use of
				cookies

I do not accept the use of
				cookies

This feature requires cookies.

Modify