ANNUAL
REPORT
OF
THE
BOARD
OF
GOVERNORS
OF
THE
FEDERAL
RESERVE
SYSTEM
90th
91st
2004
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
2003
PDF_cover_artwork_04.pmd 1 4/22/2005, 12:42 PM

91st
2004
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System

This publication is available from the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System,
Publications Fulfillment, Mail Stop 127, Washington, DC 20551. It is also available on the
Board’s web site, at www.federalreserve.gov.

Letter of Transmittal
Board of Governors of the
Federal Reserve System
Washington, D.C., April 2005
The Speaker of
The House of Representatives
Pursuant to the requirements of section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act,
I am pleased to submit the ninety-first annual report of the Board of Governors
of the Federal Reserve System.
This report covers operations of the Board during calendar year 2004.
Sincerely,

Contents
Monetary Policy and Economic Developments
3 MONETARY POLICY AND THE ECONOMIC OUTLOOK
4 Monetary Policy, Financial Markets, and the Economy in 2004 and Early 2005
7 Economic Projections for 2005 and 2006
9 ECONOMIC AND FINANCIAL DEVELOPMENTS IN 2004 AND EARLY 2005
10 The Household Sector
12 The Business Sector
15 The Government Sector
18 The External Sector
20 The Labor Market
21 Prices
23 U.S. Financial Markets
27 International Developments
31 MONETARY POLICY REPORT OF JULY 2004
31 Monetary Policy and the Economic Outlook
34 Economic and Financial Developments in 2004
Federal Reserve Operations
55 CONSUMER AND COMMUNITY AFFAIRS
55 Implementation of Statutes Designed to Inform and Protect Consumers
62 Supervision for Compliance with Consumer Protection and
Community Reinvestment Laws
73 Consumer Complaints
75 Advice from the Consumer Advisory Council
77 Promotion of Community Economic Development in Historically
Underserved Markets
83 Outreach Activities
85 BANKING SUPERVISION AND REGULATION
87 Scope of Responsibilities for Supervision and Regulation
88 Supervision for Safety and Soundness
97 Supervisory Policy
107 Supervisory Information Technology
108 Staff Development
110 Regulation of the U.S. Banking Structure

114 Enforcement of Other Laws and Regulations
115 Federal Reserve Membership
117 FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS
117 Major Initiatives
118 Developments in Federal Reserve Priced Services
123 Developments in Currency and Coin
124 Developments in Fiscal Agency and Government Depository Services
127 Electronic Access
127 Information Technology
128 Examinations of the Federal Reserve Banks
129 Income and Expenses
130 Holdings of Securities and Loans
130 Volume of Operations
130 Federal Reserve Bank Premises
132 Pro Forma Financial Statements for Federal Reserve Priced Services
137 THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS AND THE GOVERNMENT PERFORMANCE
AND RESULTS ACT
137 Strategic Plan, Performance Plan, and Performance Report
137 Mission
137 Goals and Objectives
139 Interagency Coordination
141 FEDERAL LEGISLATIVE PROPOSALS
141 Interest on Depository Institution Balances Held at Federal Reserve Banks
141 Interest on Demand Deposits
142 Depository Institution Reserve Requirements
142 Interstate Branching
Records
147 RECORD OF POLICY ACTIONS OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
147 Regulation B (Equal Credit Opportunity), Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers),
Regulation M (Consumer Leasing), Regulation Z (Truth in Lending), and
Regulation DD (Truth in Savings)
147 Regulation C (Home Mortgage Disclosure)
147 Regulation D (Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions)
148 Regulation H (Membership of State Banking Institutions in the
Federal Reserve System) and Regulation Y (Bank Holding Companies and
Change in Bank Control)
148 Regulation H, Regulation K (International Banking Operations),
Regulation V (Fair Credit Reporting), and Regulation Y
148 Regulation J (Collection of Checks and Other Items by Federal Reserve Banks and
Funds Transfers through Fedwire)

148 Regulation V
149 Regulation Z
149 Regulation BB (Community Reinvestment)
150 Regulation CC (Availability of Funds and Collection of Checks)
150 Rules of Practice for Hearings
150 Policy Statements and Other Actions
151 Discount Rates in 2004
155 MINUTES OF FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE MEETINGS
155 Authorization for Domestic Open Market Operations
157 Guidelines for the Conduct of System Open Market Operations
in Federal Agency Issues
157 Domestic Policy Directive
157 Authorization for Foreign Currency Operations
159 Foreign Currency Directive
159 Procedural Instructions with Respect to Foreign Currency Operations
160 Meeting Held on January 27–28, 2004
175 Meeting Held on March 16, 2004
183 Meeting Held on May 4, 2004
192 Meeting Held on June 29–30, 2004
200 Meeting Held on August 10, 2004
208 Meeting Held on September 21, 2004
215 Meeting Held on November 10, 2004
222 Meeting Held on December 14, 2004
231 LITIGATION
231 Judicial Review of Board Orders under the Bank Holding Company Act
231 Litigation under the Financial Institutions Supervisory Act
231 Other Actions
Federal Reserve System Organization
235 BOARD OF GOVERNORS
238 FEDERAL OPEN MARKET COMMITTEE
239 ADVISORY COUNCILS TO THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS
239 Federal Advisory Council
240 Consumer Advisory Council
241 Thrift Institutions Advisory Council
242 FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS AND BRANCHES
242 Officers of the Banks and Branches

243 Conference of Chairmen
243 Conference of Presidents
244 Conference of First Vice Presidents
244 Directors of the Banks and Branches
261 MEMBERS OF THE BOARD OF GOVERNORS, 1913–2004
Statistical Tables
266 1. Statement of Condition of the Federal Reserve Banks, by Bank,
December 31, 2004 and 2003
270 2. Federal Reserve Open Market Transactions, 2004
274 3. Federal Reserve Bank Holdings of U.S. Treasury and Federal Agency Securities,
December 31, 2002–04
275 4. Number and Annual Salaries of Officers and Employees of the Federal Reserve
Banks, December 31, 2004
276 5. Income and Expenses of the Federal Reserve Banks, by Bank, 2004
280 6. Income and Expenses of the Federal Reserve Banks, 1914–2004
284 7. Acquisition Costs and Net Book Value of Premises of the Federal Reserve
Banks and Branches, December 31, 2004
285 8. Operations in Principal Departments of the Federal Reserve Banks, 2001–2004
286 9. Federal Reserve Bank Interest Rates on Loans to Depository Institutions,
December 31, 2004
287 10. Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions, December 31, 2004
288 11. Initial Margin Requirements under Regulations T, U, and X
289 12. Principal Assets and Liabilities of Insured Commercial Banks
in the United States, by Class of Bank, June 30, 2004 and 2003
290 13. Reserves of Depository Institutions, Federal Reserve Bank Credit,
and Related Items
A. Year-End 1984–2004 and Month-End 2004
B. Year-End 1918–1983
298 14. Banking Offices and Banks Affiliated with Bank Holding Companies
in the United States, December 31, 2003 and 2004
Federal Reserve System Audits
301 AUDITS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
303 BOARD OF GOVERNORS FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
315 FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS COMBINED FINANCIAL STATEMENTS
329 OFFICE OF INSPECTOR GENERAL ACTIVITIES
330 GENERAL ACCOUNTING OFFICE REVIEWS
331 MAPS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
337 INDEX

Monetary Policy and
Economic Developments

3
Monetary Policy and the Economic Outlook
The year 2004 was marked by contin­ inflation moved up as well. In response
ued expansion in economic activity to positive economic news and higher
and appreciable gains in employment. inflation during this period, market
With fiscal policy stimulative, monetary participants came to anticipate that
policy accommodative, and financial monetary policy tightening would begin
conditions favorable, household spend­ sooner than they had expected, and
ing remained buoyant and businesses interest rates increased considerably.
increased investment in capital equip­ With the economic expansion more
ment and inventories, despite the firmly established and slack in labor and
restraint imposed by sizable increases product markets somewhat diminished,
in oil prices. Labor market conditions the Federal Open Market Committee
improved significantly, albeit at an (FOMC) at its June meeting began to
uneven pace, and productivity rose nota­ reduce the substantial degree of mone­
bly further. Consumer price inflation tary accommodation that was in place.
moved higher with the surge in energy The gradual removal of monetary
prices, but core consumer price inflation policy stimulus continued in the sec­
(that is, excluding food and energy) ond half of the year as the economy
remained well contained, and measures expanded at a healthy clip on balance.
of expected inflation over longer hori­ Around midyear, some measures of
zons held steady or edged lower. growth in activity softened, partly
Although economic activity had because of the drain on income and the
increased substantially in 2003, the rise in business costs created by higher
expansion nevertheless appeared some­ oil prices. The expansion of consumer
what tentative as 2004 opened, in large spending slowed in the spring, and the
measure because businesses still seemed pace of hiring and gains in industrial
to be reluctant to boost hiring. Over the production dropped back notably dur­
course of the spring, however, it became ing the summer. Equity prices and
clearer that the expansion was solidify­ longer-term interest rates moved lower
ing. Businesses added appreciably to over this period as well. In the event,
their payrolls, boosted investment in the slowdown in household spending
equipment and software, and started growth proved short lived. Both hiring
restocking inventories. While household and increases in factory output stepped
spending growth softened somewhat, up again in the autumn, and these
residential construction expanded rap­ gains were extended early this year.
idly. Rising energy prices boosted over­ With profits healthy and financial condi­
all consumer price inflation, and core tions still supportive, capital spending
increased at a brisk pace throughout
Note. The discussion here and in the next the year. Over the final quarter of 2004,
section (‘‘Economic and Financial Developments short-term interest rates rose further as
in 2004 and Early 2005’’) consists of the text, monetary policy was firmed at each
tables, and selected charts from the Monetary Pol­
FOMC meeting, but long-term interest
icy Report submitted to the Congress on Febru­
rates were largely unchanged. Equity
ary 16, 2005, pursuant to section 2B of the Federal
Reserve Act. prices rose appreciably in the fourth

4 91st Annual Report, 2004
quarter, and the dollar depreciated higher oil and import prices diminish­
against most other major currencies. The ing, the prospects for inflation staying
FOMC increased the target federal funds low are good. A favorable economic
rate 25 basis points again at its meet­ outcome is, of course, not assured, but
ing this month, bringing the cumulative at the most recent FOMC meeting the
tightening over the past year to 11⁄
2
per­ Committee again assessed the risks to
centage points. both output and inflation as balanced.
The fundamental factors underlying The Committee also reaffirmed that it is
the continued strength of the economy prepared to respond to events as neces­
last year should carry forward into sary in its pursuit of price stability.
2005 and 2006, promoting both healthy
expansion of activity and low inflation.
Monetary Policy, Financial
Monetary policy is still accommodative,
Markets, and the Economy
and financial conditions more generally
in 2004 and Early 2005
continue to be advantageous for house­
holds and firms. Profits have been ris­ In early 2004, against the backdrop of
ing briskly, and corporate borrowing stimulative fiscal and monetary policy,
costs are low. Household net worth has continued rapid growth in productiv­
increased with the continued sharp rise ity, and supportive financial market
in the value of real estate assets as well conditions, business outlays appeared to
as gains in equity prices, and this will be firming significantly and household
likely help support consumer demand in spending remained strong. The FOMC
the future. Absent a significant increase became more confident that the eco­
in oil prices from current levels, the nomic expansion was likely gaining
drag from last year’s run-up should traction and that the risk of significant
wane this year. The lagged effects of further disinflation had been greatly
the decline in the exchange value of the reduced. In these circumstances, it rec­
dollar since the autumn and sustained ognized that a highly accommodative
foreign economic growth are likely to stance for monetary policy could not
boost the demand for U.S. exports. The be maintained indefinitely. Nonetheless,
prospects for the expansion of aggregate the Committee was concerned about
supply also appear to be quite favorable. the persistently slow pace of hiring and
Gains in structural labor productivity viewed underlying inflation pressures as
should continue, although not necessar­ likely to remain subdued. Accordingly,
ily at the pace of recent years. Economic the Committee left its target for the fed­
growth will likely be sufficient to gen­ eral funds rate unchanged at 1 percent at
erate notable increases in employment, its January and March meetings. How­
although any reversal of the decline in ever, beginning in January, it modified
labor force participation observed since the language of its policy statement to
2001 would tend to hold up the unem­ gain greater flexibility to tighten policy
ployment rate. Core consumer price should circumstances warrant by indi­
inflation has remained low since the cating that monetary policy accom­
larger increases posted in the early modation would eventually have to be
months of 2004, and long-term infla­ removed. At the same time, the Com­
tion expectations have been similarly mittee suggested that it could be patient
well contained. With some slack likely in undertaking such actions.
remaining in labor and product markets By the time of the May and June
at present and with the indirect effects of FOMC meetings, incoming economic

Monetary Policy and the Economic Outlook 5
Selected Interest Rates
Percent
6
5
Ten-year Treasury
4
3
Two-year Treasury
2
1
Intended federal funds rate
1/30 5/7 8/13 11/6 1/29 5/6 8/12 10/28 1/28 5/4 8/10 11/10 2/2
3/19 6/26 9/24 12/10 3/18 6/25 9/16 12/9 3/16 6/30 9/21 12/14
2002 2003 2004 2005
NOTE. The data are daily and extend through February 9, 2005. Treasury rates are constant-maturity yields based
on the most actively traded securities. The dates on the horizontal axis are those of FOMC meetings.
SOURCE. Department of the Treasury and the Federal Reserve.
data pointed to a broader and more that policy would probably soon need to
firmly established expansion, with con­ move toward a more neutral stance,
tinued strength in housing markets and though probably not at a rapid pace. The
business fixed investment. Also, the Committee retained this language at the
employment reports for March, April, June meeting while raising its target for
and May had indicated strong and wide­ the federal funds rate from 1 percent
spread gains in private nonfarm pay­ to 11⁄
4
percent and noting that it would
rolls, and previous reports for January ‘‘respond to changes in economic pros­
and February were revised upward sig­ pects as needed to fulfill its obligation to
nificantly. Overall consumer price infla­ maintain price stability.’’
tion in the first quarter was faster than The information that the Committee
it had been a year earlier, and core infla­ had received by the time of its August
tion also increased, in part because of meeting indicated that economic growth
the indirect effects of higher energy had softened somewhat earlier in the
prices. The Committee maintained its summer. Although the housing market
target for the federal funds rate at 1 per­ had remained strong and business out­
cent in May, but on the basis of the lays had continued to be healthy, con­
evolving outlook for economic activity sumer spending growth had slowed sig­
and prices, it revised its assessment of nificantly, and industrial production had
risks to indicate that the upside and begun to level off. Also, the June and
downside risks for inflation had moved July labor market reports revealed that
into balance. The Committee also stated employment growth had slowed consid­
that monetary policy accommodation erably. At the same time, core consumer
could ‘‘be removed at a pace that is price inflation had moderated in May
likely to be measured’’ to communicate and June even though sizable increases
its belief, given its economic outlook, in food and energy prices continued.

6 91st Annual Report, 2004
However, the Committee believed that that higher oil prices had damped the
the softness in economic activity was pace of economic activity around mid­
caused importantly by higher prices of year, it nonetheless saw the expansion
imported oil and would prove short as still on solid footing. Consequently,
lived. With financial conditions remain­ the Committee agreed to increase its
ing stimulative, the economy appeared target for the federal funds rate another
poised to grow at a pace sufficient to 25 basis points, to 13⁄
4
percent; to reiter­
trim slack in resource utilization. In that ate its view that the risks to price stabil­
regard, given the unusually low level of ity and to sustainable growth were bal­
the federal funds rate, especially relative anced; and to repeat its indication that
to the level of inflation, policymakers the removal of policy accommodation
noted that significant cumulative policy would likely proceed at a ‘‘measured’’
tightening would likely be needed to pace. The reaction in financial markets
meet the Federal Reserve’s long-run to the policy rate decision and the
objectives of price stability and sustain­ accompanying statement was muted.
able economic growth. The Commit­ The information in hand at the time
tee’s decision at the meeting to raise its of the November FOMC meeting gen­
target for the federal funds rate 25 basis erally suggested that the economy had
points, to 11⁄
2
percent, and to maintain continued to expand at a moderate rate
its assessment of balanced risks with despite the restraint that higher oil prices
respect to sustainable growth and price imparted to real incomes and consumer
stability was largely anticipated by confidence. Consumer and business
financial markets. However, market par­ spending stayed firm, and the hous­
ticipants revised up their expectations ing market remained buoyant. How­
for the path of the federal funds rate, ever, industrial production was about
reportedly because the announcement unchanged, and the news on job growth
conveyed a somewhat more optimistic was uneven—lackluster increases in
outlook for the economy than many had nonfarm payrolls in September were
anticipated. followed by robust expansion in Octo­
By the time of the September FOMC ber. Inflation measures were moderate,
meeting, available information sug­ although up somewhat from one year
gested that the economy had regained earlier. On balance, the Committee saw
momentum. Real consumer spending the economy as growing at a pace that
bounced back sharply in July after a would reduce margins of slack in the
weak second quarter, and incoming data utilization of resources. The Committee
on industrial production indicated a also judged that inflationary pressures
modest strengthening. Housing activity would likely be well contained if mone­
had increased further, and business out­ tary policy accommodation were gradu­
lays had picked up significantly in the ally withdrawn. The Committee’s deci­
second quarter. In addition, the labor sion to raise its target for the federal
market showed signs of improvement in funds rate from 13⁄
4
percent to 2 percent
August, as the unemployment rate edged with minimal change in the language in
down and nonfarm payrolls grew mod­ the accompanying statement was largely
erately. Core consumer price inflation anticipated by financial markets and
slowed in June and July, and a decline in elicited little reaction.
energy prices from record levels pushed At its December meeting, the Com­
down readings on headline inflation. mittee viewed available information as
Although the Committee acknowledged continuing to indicate that the pace of

Monetary Policy and the Economic Outlook 7
the economic expansion was sufficient and that earlier release might adversely
to further reduce the underutilization affect the Committee’s discussions and,
of resources, despite elevated oil prices. perhaps, the minutes themselves. After
Consumer spending remained solid, weighing these considerations, the Com­
investment spending was strong, and mittee voted unanimously to publish the
manufacturing production showed mod­ FOMC minutes three weeks after the
est growth. Also, employment gains in day of the policy decision.
October and November were consistent The information that the Committee
with gradual improvement in the labor reviewed at its February 2005 meeting
market. Meanwhile, core inflation, while indicated that the economy had con­
above the unusually low rates of late tinued to expand at a steady pace. The
2003, remained subdued. Accordingly, labor market showed signs of further
the Committee voted to raise its target improvement, and consumer spending
for the federal funds rate 25 basis points, and the housing market remained
to 21⁄
4
percent, and to retain the previous robust. Industrial production acceler­
statement that the removal of policy ated, particularly at the end of 2004, and
accommodation would likely be ‘‘mea­ growth of business fixed investment
sured.’’ Investors had largely anticipated was solid in the fourth quarter. Core
the policy rate decision, but a few mar­ inflation stayed moderate, and measures
ket participants had reportedly specu­ of inflation expectations remained well
lated that the Committee would signal anchored. Given the solid economic
increased concern about inflationary expansion and limited price pressures,
pressures. In the absence of any such the Committee voted to continue its
signal, implied rates on near-dated removal of policy accommodation by
futures contracts and longer-term Trea­ raising its target for the federal funds
sury yields declined a few basis points rate from 21⁄
4
percent to 21⁄
2
percent
after the release of the December and to essentially repeat the language
statement. of the December statement. Futures
Also at its December meeting, the market quotes indicated that investors
Committee considered an accelerated had already priced in a 25 basis point
release of the minutes of FOMC meet­ increase in the target federal funds rate
ings. The Committee’s practice had at the meeting, and market participants
been to publish the minutes for each reportedly expected no substantive
meeting on the Thursday after the next changes to the accompanying state­
scheduled meeting. The Committee ment. Accordingly, the reaction in finan­
believed that, because the minutes con­ cial markets to the announcement was
tain a more nuanced explanation of pol­ minimal.
icy decisions than the statement released
immediately after each meeting, pub­
Economic Projections
lishing them on a timelier basis would
for 2005 and 2006
help market participants interpret eco­
nomic developments and thereby better Federal Reserve policymakers expect
anticipate the course of interest rates. the economy to expand moderately and
Earlier release would also provide a con­ inflation to remain low in 2005 and
text for the public remarks of individual 2006.1 The central tendency of the fore­
FOMC members. It was also recog­
nized, however, that financial markets
1. As a further step to enhance monetary policy
might misinterpret the minutes at times communications, Federal Reserve policymakers

8 91st Annual Report, 2004
Economic Projections for 2005 and 2006
Percent
Federal Reserve Governors
and Reserve Bank presidents
Memo:
Indicator 2005 2006
2004 actual
Central Central
Range Range
tendency tendency
Change, fourth quarter
to fourth quarter1
Nominal GDP ................. 6.2 5–6 51⁄2–53⁄4 5–53⁄4 5–51⁄2
Real GDP ..................... 3.7 31⁄2–4 33⁄4–4 31⁄4–33⁄4 31⁄2
PCE price index excluding
food and energy ........... 1.6 11⁄2–2 11⁄2–13⁄4 11⁄2–2 11⁄2–13⁄4
Average level, fourth quarter
Civilian unemployment rate .... 5.4 5–51⁄2 51⁄4 5–51⁄4 5–51⁄4
1. Change from average for fourth quarter of previous
year to average for fourth quarter of year indicated.
casts of real GDP growth made by the project real GDP to increase about
members of the Board of Governors and 31⁄
2
percent, and they expect the unem­
the Federal Reserve Bank presidents is ployment rate to edge down to between
33⁄
4
percent to 4 percent over the four 5 percent and 51⁄
4
percent. With regard
quarters of 2005. The civilian unem­ to inflation, FOMC participants project
ployment rate is expected to average that the chain-type price index for
about 51⁄
4
percent in the fourth quarter personal consumption expenditures
of 2005. For 2006, the policymakers excluding food and energy (core PCE)
will increase between 11⁄
2
percent and
will now provide economic projections for two
13⁄
4
percent both this year and next—
about the same as the 1.6 percent
years, rather than one, in the February Monetary
Policy Report. increase posted over 2004.

9
Economic and Financial Developments
in 2004 and Early 2005
The economy proved to be sufficiently unusually low levels recorded in 2003, it
resilient to maintain solid growth and remained well contained. Price increases
moderate core inflation in 2004 even were restrained by continuing, though
as higher oil prices drained consumers’ diminishing, slack in labor and prod­
purchasing power and boosted firms’ uct markets, which tended to offset the
costs. Real GDP rose 33⁄
4
percent last effects of higher energy and commodity
year after having increased 41⁄
2
percent prices, as well as the weaker dollar,
in 2003. Activity was supported by con­ on firms’ overall costs. In addition, solid
tinued robust advances in household productivity gains implied that unit
spending. In addition, capital spending labor costs rose only modestly, even
by businesses increased notably. Labor if up from the declines in the preced­
market conditions improved signifi­ ing two years. The decline in crude oil
cantly, though at an uneven pace over prices, on balance, since October points
the course of the year. Private pay­ to some easing of cost pressures on
rolls, which turned up in late 2003, rose firms from that source in the period
170,000 per month last year, on average, ahead.
and the unemployment rate declined Several forces likely contributed to
below 51⁄
2
percent by year-end and to last year’s impressive economic perfor­
51⁄
4
percent in January 2005—the lowest mance in the face of the sizable adverse
rates since 2001. oil shock. The growth of real output
Consumer price inflation was driven continued to be undergirded by gains
higher last year by the sharp rise in in structural labor productivity. More­
energy prices. Although core consumer over, fiscal policy remained stimulative
price inflation moved up somewhat from last year through the combination of the
lagged effect of earlier cuts in personal
Change in Real GDP
Change in PCE Chain-Type Price Index
Percent, annual rate
Percent
Total
6
Excluding food and energy
3
4
2
2
1
1998 2000 2002 2004
1998 2000 2002 2004
NOTE. Here and in subsequent charts, except as noted,
change for a given period is measured to its final quarter NOTE. The data are for personal consumption
from the final quarter of the preceding period. expenditures (PCE).
SOURCE. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Eco­ SOURCE. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Eco­
nomic Analysis. nomic Analysis.

10 91st Annual Report, 2004
tax rates, the rise in defense spending, exceeded 5 percent; however, spending
and perhaps also the partial-expensing on computing equipment increased less
tax incentives for business investment. in 2004 than in preceding years, and
Monetary policy was highly accommo­ consumers responded to the high cost
dative in the early part of the year and of gasoline and heating fuel by cutting
remained accommodative, though pro­ back on real spending for these items.
gressively less so throughout the year, Real outlays for services also increased
and credit remained readily available at rapidly last year, and medical services
favorable terms. Consumer demand posted especially large gains.
was also boosted by the strong increases Real disposable personal income
in asset values during the past two (DPI) rose nearly 4 percent last year, but
years. this figure is exaggerated by Microsoft’s
Financial conditions remained stimu­ $32 billion special dividend payment
lative last year even as market partici­ in December (the bulk of which is esti­
pants revised up their expectations for mated to have accrued to U.S. house­
the near-term path of monetary policy. holds). If this one-time event is excluded
Interest rates on longer-term Treasury from the calculation, real DPI rose only
securities remained low, risk spreads on 23⁄
4
percent in 2004, well below the
corporate bonds narrowed, and commer­ increase posted in 2003. Faster job
cial banks eased terms and standards growth helped to support increases in
on business loans. In this environment, households’ incomes last year in nomi­
household debt again increased briskly. nal terms, and the Jobs and Growth
The borrowing needs of nonfinancial Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003
businesses were damped by their strong (JGTRRA), which brought lower per­
cash flows. Equity values rose, espe­ sonal tax rates forward into 2003, led to
cially toward the end of the year. At the larger refunds and smaller final pay­
same time, the exchange value of the ments in the spring of 2004. However,
dollar declined, on net, over the year as real income gains were held down, as
market participants apparently focused higher oil prices siphoned off household
on the financing implications of the purchasing power.
large and growing U.S. current account With the growth of real consumption
deficit. spending outpacing that of real income
through most of last year, the personal
The Household Sector
Change in Real Income and Consumption
Consumer Spending
Percent, annual rate
Consumer spending grew substantially
Disposable personal income
last year. Personal consumption expen­
Personal consumption 8
ditures (PCE) advanced nearly 4 per­
expenditures
cent in real terms, about the same as 6
the increase in 2003. Sales of new motor
4
vehicles remained brisk, on average,
at 163⁄ 4 million units. Excluding motor 2
vehicles, consumer spending on most
categories of durable and nondurable 1998 2000 2002 2004
goods rose rapidly, as gains in real
SOURCE. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Eco­
expenditures for food and clothing both nomic Analysis.

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 11
saving rate moved lower, from 11⁄
2
per­ able and relatively low-cost source of
cent, on average, in 2003 to only 1⁄
2
per­ funds for financing consumption.
cent in the third quarter of last year. Consumer confidence, which had
(The fourth-quarter surge in income improved in 2003, remained at generally
associated with the Microsoft dividend favorable levels last year, according to
payments pushed the saving rate back surveys by both the Michigan Survey
up to 11⁄
4
percent, but this increase will Research Center (SRC) and the Confer­
likely be reversed early this year as ence Board. Confidence tended to dip
dividend income falls back. Because the at times during the year when energy
company’s share price declined in step prices were moving up most rapidly, but
with the dividend payouts, the dividends it recovered soon after those episodes.
had no effect on shareholders’ overall
financial resources and so probably had
Residential Investment
little effect on consumption.)
Low interest rates were one factor Residential investment remained robust
that helped to support consumption last year. Real expenditures increased
growth—especially for durable goods— 53⁄
4
percent in 2004—the third straight
despite comparatively slow gains in real year of strong gains. Demand for hous­
income. Higher household wealth was ing was influenced by the same factors
also an important force that propelled that affected household spending more
consumer spending last year. According generally, but it was especially sup­
to the Federal Reserve’s flow of funds ported by nominal mortgage interest
accounts, the ratio of household net rates that have remained near their low­
worth to disposable income rose sharply est levels since the late 1960s. Rates on
in 2003, as corporate equity values thirty-year fixed-rate mortgages fluc­
rebounded and home prices continued to tuated between about 51⁄
2
percent and
rise. Moreover, although equity values 61⁄
4
percent over the past two years; they
were little changed, on net, through edged up to the high end of that range
much of 2004 before rising notably in during the spring but dropped back to
the final quarter, home prices continued under 6 percent by the end of summer
to rise throughout the year, and the and now stand below 53⁄
4
percent.
wealth-to-income ratio moved up fur­
ther; by the third quarter (the most
recent period for which the complete Mortgage Rates
wealth data are available), the ratio had
reversed nearly half its decline since Percent
the stock market peak in 2000. Because
Fixed rate
wealth feeds through into household
7
spending over a period of several quar­
ters, the wealth increases in both 2003
5
and 2004 were important in supporting
consumer spending last year. The rise
Adjustable rate 3
in house prices, together with continued
low interest rates, also led consumers
to extract additional equity from their 2001 2002 2003 2004 2005
homes, in particular through home NOTE. The data, which are weekly and extend
equity loans. Such actions provided through February 9, 2005, are contract rates on
thirty-year mortgages.
many households with a readily avail­ SOURCE. Federal Home Loan Mortgage Corporation.

12 91st Annual Report, 2004
In the single-family sector, housing in 2003. Refinancing activity fell off
starts amounted to 1.6 million units last sharply last year, as the pool of outstand­
year, a rate faster than the already rapid ing mortgages with interest rates above
pace of 1.5 million units started in 2003. current market rates shrank consider­
In the multifamily sector, starts totaled ably. Mortgages with adjustable interest
a solid 350,000 units last year, a figure rates, including hybrids that feature both
in line with that of the preceding several fixed and adjustable interest rate com­
years. Sales of both new and existing ponents, were increasingly popular in
single-family homes hit new highs last 2004. Consumer credit continued to
year, and home prices moved up sharply. expand at a moderate pace by historical
The repeat-transactions price index for standards, restrained in part by the sub­
existing homes (limited to purchase stitution of other forms of debt, such as
transactions only), which is published home equity loans. Higher interest rates
by the Office of Federal Housing Enter­ on some consumer loans and credit
prise Oversight, climbed more than cards in the second half of 2004 may
10 percent over the four quarters end­ have also damped the growth of con­
ing in the third quarter of last year (the sumer credit.
latest quarter for which data are avail­ Relatively low interest rates and fur­
able) and is up a cumulative 65 per­ ther gains in disposable personal income
cent since 1997, when it started to limited pressures on household balance
rise notably more rapidly than overall sheets in 2004. Measures of aggregate
inflation. These price increases have household financial obligations and debt
also outstripped by a wide margin the service, which capture pre-committed
increases in household incomes and expenditures relative to disposable
rents. Another nationwide price index, income, were little changed last year, on
the Census Bureau’s constant-quality balance, though they remained high by
price index for new homes, rose only historical standards. Nevertheless, mea­
63⁄
4
percent last year. Because this sures of household credit quality either
index does not adjust for the location held steady or improved during the
of new homes within metropolitan course of the year. The latest available
areas, and because new homes consti­ data indicate that delinquency rates on
tute only a small fraction of the overall credit card loans, consumer loans, and
housing stock, this index is probably a residential mortgages at commercial
less reliable indicator of overall home banks declined, while those on auto
values than is the repeat-transactions loans at captive finance companies were
index. about unchanged at a low level. House­
hold bankruptcy filings ran below the
elevated levels of 2003, although they
Household Finance
stayed generally above the rates posted
Household debt is estimated to have in earlier years.
increased about 93⁄
4
percent in 2004, a
touch less than in the previous year.
The Business Sector
Mortgage debt again paced this advance.
The brisk expansion of mortgages
Fixed Investment
reflected continued strong activity in
housing markets and rising house prices. Business fixed investment rose robustly
However, the growth rate of mortgage for a second consecutive year in 2004.
debt did not quite match that registered Real spending on equipment and soft­

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 13
ware (E&S) increased 131⁄
2
percent, cent last year after having risen 19 per­
about as much as in 2003, as firms’ final cent in 2003; these gains followed two
sales continued to increase, profits and years of declines. Although the pattern
cash flow rose further, and many busi­ of spending was uneven over the four
nesses reported a need to replace or quarters of 2004, for the year as a whole,
upgrade existing equipment and soft­ business outlays for computing equip­
ware. Although many firms had little ment rose 25 percent in real terms, while
need to seek outside financing given spending on software and communi­
their flush cash situation, those that did cations equipment posted increases of
generally found financial markets to 13 percent and 10 percent respectively.
be receptive—interest rates remained Outside of the high-tech sector, business
low, and other terms and conditions spending on aircraft moved lower for
stayed relatively favorable. The partial- the third consecutive year, as airlines
expensing tax incentives, which covered continued to struggle with a highly com­
new equipment and software installed petitive market environment and high
by the end of 2004, boosted profits and fuel prices. In contrast, business outlays
cash flow and may have also stimulated on motor vehicles rose substantially last
some investment spending. year, with the demand for trucks excep­
Increases in E&S spending were tionally strong. Investment in equipment
fairly widespread across categories other than high-tech and transportation
of capital goods. Spending on high- goods—a category that includes indus­
technology equipment increased 151⁄
2
per- trial machinery and a wide range of
other types of equipment—moved up
11 percent last year, the most in more
Change in Real Business Fixed Investment than ten years.
In contrast to the rebound in equip­
Percent, annual rate ment spending, real outlays in the non­
Structures residential construction sector were
20
Equipment and software about unchanged for a second year in
10 2004 and have yet to recover from their
+
0_ sharp downturn during 2001 and 2002.
In the office sector, where construc­
10
tion increased rapidly in the late 1990s,
20 spending has remained especially weak;
vacancy rates for these properties,
although down a touch over the past
High-tech equipment
year, are still quite elevated. Construc­
and software 60
Other equipment excluding tion of industrial buildings has also
transportation 40 remained low as a result of high
vacancy rates. In contrast, demand for
20
new retail and wholesale properties has
+
0_ been firmer, reportedly a reflection of
the steady increases in consumer spend­
1998 2000 2002 2004 ing, and outlays for these types of build­
ings moved higher last year. In addition,
NOTE. High-tech equipment consists of computers
and peripheral equipment and communications investment in the drilling and mining
equipment. sector rose last year in response to high
SOURCE. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Eco­
nomic Analysis. prices for natural gas.

14 91st Annual Report, 2004
Inventory Investment Before-Tax Profits of Nonfinancial
Corporations as a Percent of Sector GDP
Businesses added appreciably to inven­
tories last year for the first time since Percent
running down their holdings sharply in
2001. As economic activity strength­ 14
ened during 2002 and 2003, many 12
businesses chose to operate with inven­
10
tories that were increasingly lean rela­
tive to sales. In 2004, when stocks 8
had become quite spare—even after tak­ 6
ing into account the ongoing improve­
ments in inventory management that 1980 1984 1988 1992 1996 2000 2004
have allowed firms to economize NOTE. The data are quarterly and extend through
on stockholding—and businesses had 2004:Q3. Profits are from domestic operations of
nonfinancial corporations, with inventory valuation and
apparently grown more confident in the
capital consumption adjustments.
durability of the recovery, businesses SOURCE. Department of Commerce, Bureau of Eco­
accumulated $45 billion of inventories nomic Analysis.
(in real terms), according to preliminary
data. The step-up in the pace of stock-
consecutive year. In the fourth quarter of
building contributed about 1⁄
4
percent­
2004, operating earnings per share for
age point to GDP growth last year.
S&P 500 firms were nearly 20 percent
above their level four quarters earlier.
Analysts’ earnings forecasts began to
Corporate Profits and
moderate somewhat in the second half
Business Finance
of 2004 after several months of strong
Strong growth of corporate profits again upward revisions.
allowed many firms to finance capital In equity markets, net issuance of
spending with internal funds last year. shares by nonfinancial firms turned
As a result, nonfinancial business debt more negative in 2004. Although initial
rose at only a moderate pace. Net equity public offerings rebounded from the
issuance dropped further into negative sluggish pace of the past two years,
territory in 2004, and on balance non­ ample profits and sizable cash holdings
financial corporations are estimated to helped boost share retirements from
have raised no net funds in credit and mergers and repurchases.
equity markets. However, short-term Net corporate bond issuance was
business debt, including commercial sluggish in 2004, as firms evidently
paper and commercial and industrial relied heavily on their considerable prof­
(C&I) loans, expanded last year after its to fund investment in fixed capital
three years of contraction, and commer­ and inventories. The timing of gross
cial mortgage debt continued to increase bond issuance was influenced by inter­
rapidly. The credit quality of businesses est rate movements during the year, as
remained strong. firms took advantage of occasional dips
Corporate profits held up well in 2004 in longer-term yields to issue bonds.
after surging in the previous year. The Firms reportedly used a large portion
ratio of before-tax profits of nonfinan­ of the proceeds to pay down existing
cial corporations to that sector’s gross debt, although some companies used the
value added increased for a second funds raised in the bond market to

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 15
Selected Components of Net Business already substantial cash positions on
Financing firms’ balance sheets. The delinquency
rate on C&I loans declined further, and
Billions of dollars the twelve-month trailing default rate on
Commercial paper corporate bonds fell to historically low
600
Bonds levels before edging up late in the year.
Bank loans 400 Net upgrades of bonds by Moody’s
Sum of selected
components 200 Investors Service for both investment-
+ and speculative-grade nonfinancial
0_
firms increased last year.
200 The stock of commercial mortgage
debt outstanding grew at a rapid pace in
2002 2003 2004
2004. Some firms reportedly continued
NOTE. Seasonally adjusted annual rate for non­ to find mortgages an attractive source
financial corporate business. The data for the sum of
of long-term funding. The expansion of
selected components are quarterly. The data for
2004:Q4 are estimated. commercial mortgage credit helped pro­
SOURCE. Federal Financial Institutions Examination pel issuance of commercial-mortgage­
Council, Consolidated Reports of Condition and Income
backed securities (CMBS) to near-
(Call Report).
record levels. Delinquency rates on
repurchase equity shares or to finance commercial mortgages on the books
mergers. of banks and insurance companies
Short-term business borrowing re­ remained low throughout the year, and
vived in 2004 after a prolonged contrac­ those on loans backing mortgage securi­
tion. Commercial paper outstanding ties fell. Considerable gains in com­
turned up in the first half of the year, mercial real estate prices increased own­
although it flattened out over the second ers’ equity and largely kept pace with
half. Business loans at banks rebounded the sizable increase in mortgage debt
over the course of last year. According obligations. Yield spreads of CMBS
to results from the Federal Reserve’s over comparable Treasury securities
Senior Loan Officer Opinion Survey remained moderate.
on Bank Lending Practices, commercial
banks eased terms and standards on
The Government Sector
business loans during the course of 2004
in response to the improved economic
Federal Government
outlook and to increased competition
from other banks and nonbank lend­ The federal budget position deteriorated
ers. Survey responses also indicated slightly further in 2004, as spending
an increase in demand for C&I loans increases and further tax reductions
that reflected firms’ need to fund rising offset the effects of stronger economic
accounts receivable, inventories, capital growth on revenues. The unified budget
expenditures, and merger activity. Con­ deficit widened from $378 billion in fis­
cerns over loan quality seemed to dimin­ cal 2003 to $412 billion in fiscal 2004.
ish further in 2004, as spreads on lever­ As a share of GDP, the federal unified
aged deals in the syndicated loan market deficit stood close to 31⁄
2
percent in both
edged down from already low levels. years. Receipts increased 51⁄
2
percent in
Corporate credit quality remained fiscal 2004 after two years of declines.
solid in 2004 amid strong earnings, low Corporate receipts surged more than
interest rates, and a further buildup of 40 percent, or $58 billion, reflecting

16 91st Annual Report, 2004
Federal Receipts and Expenditures 2004. First, the Working Families Tax
Relief Act extended through 2010 a
Percent of nominal GDP variety of personal tax reductions that
had previously been set to expire earlier.
24 Second, the American Jobs Creation Act
Expenditures
Receipts 22 replaced the exclusion of extraterritorial
Expenditures income (which the World Trade Orga­
20
ex. net interest
nization had declared an illegal export
18
subsidy) with numerous other tax
16 reductions for domestic manufacturers
and U.S. multinationals. The first bill is
1986 1989 1992 1995 1998 2001 2004 expected to have a ten-year budget cost
NOTE. The budget data are from the unified budget of around $150 billion, while the second
and are for fiscal years (October through September); bill was scored as being revenue neutral.
GDP is for the year ending in Q3.
SOURCE. Office of Management and Budget. As for federal spending in fiscal 2005,
the regular appropriations bills provided
the improvement in corporate profits; for sizable increases in spending on
individual tax receipts—restrained by defense and homeland security and for
JGTRRA, which pulled forward reduc­ modest increases in nondefense discre­
tions of personal tax rates that had been tionary expenditures. In addition, emer­
scheduled for the second half of the gency legislation passed in the autumn
decade—rose only about 2 percent. provided disaster aid for victims of
Overall federal receipts increased less hurricanes and for ranchers and farmers
rapidly than nominal GDP, and the affected by drought conditions.
ratio of receipts to GDP edged down to The recent sizable deficits in the uni­
161⁄
4
percent, the lowest level in more fied budget mean that the federal gov­
than forty years. ernment, which had been contributing
Meanwhile, nominal federal outlays to the pool of national saving from 1997
increased about 6 percent in fiscal 2004. through 2000, has been drawing on that
Spending for national defense increased pool since 2001. Net federal saving—
especially sharply, but spending also essentially the unified budget balance
increased notably for Medicare and adjusted to the accounting practices
Medicaid. Debt service costs, which of the national income and product
fell sharply from 1997 through 2003 as accounts (NIPA)—dropped from posi­
a result of reduced debt and declining tive 2 percent of GDP in 2000 to a level
interest rates, edged higher last year. below negative 3 percent of GDP in
Federal government purchases of goods 2003 and 2004. Personal saving moved
and services—the part of spending that lower over this period as well, while
is counted in GDP—rose about 4 per­ business net saving rose with the
cent in real terms in 2004 after larger rebound in corporate profits. In all, net
increases in the preceding two years. national saving edged up in 2004 but
(Government spending on items such remained near its postwar lows. Because
as interest payments and transfers is net national saving has fallen increas­
excluded from GDP because these items ingly short of net domestic investment
do not constitute a direct purchase of over the past several years, the inflow
final production.) of foreign funds needed to finance that
Regarding legislative initiatives, two investment has risen. The growing
new tax bills were enacted in the fall of inflow of foreign capital is mirrored in

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 17
Federal Government Debt Held robust, and Treasury securities held in
by the Public custody at the Federal Reserve Bank of
New York on behalf of such institutions
Percent of nominal GDP increased just over $200 billion in 2004.
Also, data from the Treasury Interna­
55 tional Capital System showed a substan­
tial increase in holdings of Treasury
45
securities by foreign official and private
35 investors, particularly those in Japan.
The proportion of Treasury securities
25
held by foreign investors is estimated to
have risen to a record 431⁄
2
percent by
1964 1974 1984 1994 2004
the third quarter of 2004.
NOTE. Through 2003, the data for debt are year-end Treasury debt reached its statutory
figures, and the corresponding value for GDP is for Q4
ceiling late last year. To cope with
at an annual rate; the final observation is for 2004:Q3.
Excludes securities held as investments of federal gov­ the constraint, the Treasury temporarily
ernment accounts. resorted to accounting devices, sus­
pended issuance of state and local
the widening of the nation’s current government series securities, and post­
account deficit. Over time, the low poned a four-week bill auction. In mid-
national saving rate could eventually November, Congress raised the debt
slow the rise in living standards either ceiling from $7.4 trillion to $8.1 trillion,
by increasing the burden of servicing and the Treasury subsequently resumed
U.S. foreign debt or by impinging on normal financing operations.
domestic capital formation.
The growth rate of Treasury debt
State and Local Governments
moderated slightly last year after
increasing substantially in 2003. None­ Pressures on the budgets of state and
theless, federal debt held by the public local governments have eased as eco­
as a percentage of GDP continued to nomic activity has strengthened. Tax
edge higher over the course of 2004 and receipts have been spurred by the
currently stands at about 361⁄
2
percent. increases in household income, con­
To help finance substantial budget defi­ sumer spending, and property values.
cits, the Treasury issued a considerable As a result, many states seem to be on
volume of bills as well as two-, three-, track to meet balanced budget require­
five-, and ten-year nominal notes. In ments in the current fiscal year (which
addition, the Treasury expanded its ends June 30 for all but a few states)
borrowing program in 2004 by adding without using as much borrowing or
semiannual auctions of twenty-year other extraordinary measures as in
inflation-protected bonds and five-year recent years. Nevertheless, a number of
inflation-protected notes. states still must deal with lingering fiscal
Various indicators suggested a contin­ problems, particularly depleted reserve
ued strong appetite for Treasury securi­ funds, the expiration of temporary tax
ties among foreign investors last year. hikes, and rising Medicaid costs. In
Indirect bidding at Treasury auctions, addition, several states still face serious
which includes bidding by the Federal structural imbalances in their budgets.
Reserve Bank of New York on behalf Real expenditures by state and local
of foreign official institutions, remained governments as measured in the NIPAs

18 91st Annual Report, 2004
remained about flat for a second year in U.S. Trade and Current Account Balances
2004. Real spending on current opera­
tions rose less than 1 percent last year, Percent of nominal GDP
while real investment spending declined.
+
However, even as they were holding the _0
line on spending increases, states and
1
localities were able to resume net hiring
in 2004 after having left employment 2
about unchanged in 2003. Trade
3
Net issuance of debt by state and local Current
account
governments edged down from the rapid 4
pace set in 2003, as improved budget
positions permitted some contraction 5
in short-term debt. Advance refunding 6
offerings were again strong during
the year, as states and municipalities
1998 2000 2002 2004
took advantage of low long-term inter­
est rates and moderate credit spreads.
NOTE. The data are quarterly. The trade data extend
through 2004:Q4, and the current account data extend
Credit quality of tax-exempt borrowers through 2004:Q3.
improved in 2004. Rating upgrades of SOURCE. Department of Commerce.
tax-exempt bonds outpaced downgrades,
especially later in the year. boost exports in the first half, but that
stimulus diminished in the second half
of the year when foreign growth slowed.
The External Sector
For the year as a whole, exports of
After narrowing in 2003, the U.S. cur­ industrial supplies and capital goods
rent account deficit widened again last posted solid growth. Exports to Canada,
year and was $660 billion (annual rate), Mexico, and western Europe rose
or 5.6 percent of GDP, in both the smartly in 2004, whereas exports to
second and third quarters. Much of Japan were relatively weak. Real
this widening reflected a considerable exports of services increased about
increase in the deficit on goods and ser­ 31⁄
2
percent through 2004 as a whole.
vices trade, as a marked rise in imports After increasing at an annual rate of
more than offset solid increases in almost 6 percent in the first half of 2004,
exports. The trade deficit expanded from prices of exported goods moved up at
$500 billion during the fourth quarter of just a 21⁄
2
percent rate in the second
2003 to more than $650 billion, on aver­ half. This deceleration was due in large
age, during the second half of 2004. part to a reversal of the run-up in the
prices of agricultural products that had
occurred in late 2003 and early 2004.
International Trade
Better harvests last year returned prices
Real exports of goods and services rose of agricultural products to levels near
an estimated 51⁄
2
percent in 2004 despite those that had prevailed before the
a deceleration in the fourth quarter. In spike.
the first half, exports were supported by Solid growth in income in the United
the lagged effect of the fall in the dol­ States spurred growth of real imports
lar’s value in 2003. Strong expansion of of 91⁄
2
percent in 2004. The increase pri­
foreign economic activity also helped marily reflected higher imports of goods

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 19
that occurred despite a notable rise in price of WTI relative to other grades
their prices. Real oil imports expanded of crude oil. Sabotage of production and
almost 10 percent in 2004. Imports of distribution facilities in Iraq hindered oil
capital equipment increased throughout exports from that country, which remain
the year, but imports of consumer goods below pre-war levels. In Nigeria, ethnic
suffered a period of weakness through violence and community protests shut
the middle of the year before rebound­ down some production. Russian oil
ing in the fourth quarter. Imports of output, however, continued despite the
services moved up only 13⁄
4
percent in breakup of Yukos, formerly Russia’s
2004. largest oil company. Late in the year,
Prices of imported non-oil goods oil prices declined from their October
increased at an annual rate of just over highs, as production recovered in the
4 percent in the first half of 2004, but Gulf of Mexico and OPEC added new
the pace slowed to 2 percent in the capacity. The price of the far-dated
second half. This step-down largely NYMEX oil futures contract (currently
reflected a deceleration in the prices for delivery in December 2011) rose
of industrial supplies, driven by a level­ about $10 per barrel during 2004, possi­
ing off of nonfuel commodity prices bly reflecting expectations of greater
at the elevated levels reached in March. oil demand in Asian emerging-market
Declines in the prices of foods offset economies. The far-dated futures con­
continued price increases for metals. tract averaged about $38 per barrel in
The spot price of West Texas interme­ January 2005, while the spot price of
diate (WTI) crude oil moved up during WTI averaged about $48 per barrel.
most of 2004 and surged temporarily to
a record high of $55 per barrel in Octo­
The Financial Account
ber. Since then, it has fluctuated some­
what below that peak but still at levels In 2004, the U.S. current account deficit
well above $33 per barrel, the price at was financed once again largely by for­
which it started 2004. Oil prices were eign purchases of U.S. bonds. Foreign
driven up by intensified concerns that official inflows picked up further last
oil supply would not keep pace with year and were especially strong in the
surprisingly strong global demand. Oil first quarter, reflecting sizable bond
consumption in China grew nearly purchases by Asian central banks. Pri­
15 percent in 2004, pushing that econ­ vate foreign purchases of U.S. bonds
omy past Japan as the world’s second- rebounded in 2004 from a slight decline
largest consumer. As oil prices rose, in 2003, with especially large purchases
OPEC increased its oil production, coming late in the fourth quarter. In
diminishing the cartel’s estimated spare contrast, foreign demand for U.S. equi­
capacity to historically low levels. ties weakened further in 2004, although
Increased OPEC production damped this also picked up late in the year. Net
particularly the rise in prices of heavier, purchases of foreign securities by U.S.
more sulfurous grades of crude oil but investors remained strong in 2004, with
had less effect on prices of lighter grades most of the strength coming in the sec­
like WTI. Supply disruptions also ond half of the year.
played a role in the run-up of oil prices. U.S. direct investment abroad contin­
In October, Hurricane Ivan extensively ued at a strong pace, as reinvested earn­
damaged oil and gas production facili­ ings remained sizable. Direct invest­
ties in the Gulf of Mexico, boosting the ment into the United States rebounded

20 91st Annual Report, 2004
in the first three quarters of 2004 from months since then, increases in private
its anemic pace in 2003; global mergers payrolls have averaged 165,000 per
and acquisitions revived, and reinvested month.
earnings picked up. Overall, net direct The improved pace of hiring was
investment outflows continued over the widespread, as all major industry groups
first three quarters of 2004 but at a lower contributed to faster employment
pace than in 2003. growth relative to that of the latter part
Net inflows of portfolio capital of 2003. The largest gains were in
exceeded net outflows of direct invest­ professional and business services and
ment and represented the financial coun­ health services. The construction sec­
terpart to the U.S. current account defi­ tor also posted substantial gains. In the
cit. These net financial inflows imply a manufacturing sector—where employ­
further decline in the U.S. net interna­ ment had declined almost continuously
tional investment position, which began since early 2000—payrolls increased in
2004 at a reported level of negative the spring when overall employment
$2.4 trillion (22 percent of GDP). was rising sharply but were about
unchanged, on net, over the second
half of the year. Employment gains in
The Labor Market
retail trade and in food services were
also brisk over the first half of the
Employment and Unemployment
year but tapered off in the second half.
The labor market improved notably in Meanwhile, state and local governments
2004. Private payrolls, which began added substantially to their payrolls last
to post sustained increases in late year, especially for education, but civil­
2003, rose an average of 170,000 per ian employment in the federal govern­
month last year. Progress was not steady ment edged lower.
over the course of the year, however. The unemployment rate fell from
Employment growth stepped up sharply near 6 percent in late 2003 to less than
in the spring to a pace of almost 300,000 51⁄
2
percent by late last year; joblessness
per month in March, April, and May; fell further in January 2005, to 51⁄
4
per­
net hiring then dropped back to subpar cent. The decline in the unemployment
rates of about 100,000 per month in rate over the past year reflected both the
June through September. In the four pickup in hiring and a labor force par­
ticipation rate that remained surprisingly
low. From 2001 through 2003, the par­
Net Change in Payroll Employment
ticipation rate declined by more than
would have been predicted on the basis
Thousands of jobs, monthly average
of past relationships with indicators
Private nonfarm of labor demand, and in 2004, when the
400
Jan. pace of hiring increased, the participa­
200 tion rate leveled off but failed to rise.
+ These considerations suggest that there
_0
may be a persistent component to the
200 recent softness in participation. How­
ever, participation had been quite strong
through 2000, when the labor market
1999 2001 2003 2005
was extremely tight, and the fact that
SOURCE. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
participation turned down at the same
Statistics.

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 21
time that labor demand weakened sug­ with the pace of the late 1990s and well
gests that at least some of the recent above rates that had prevailed during the
low participation is cyclical. To the preceding two decades.
extent that some of this low participa­ Increases in hourly labor compensa­
tion proves to be transitory, the resump­ tion remained moderate last year. As
tion of more-rapid labor force growth measured by the employment cost index
will limit the speed at which employ­ (ECI), which is based on a quarterly
ment gains further push down the unem­ survey from the Bureau of Labor Sta­
ployment rate. tistics, hourly compensation in private
nonfarm businesses increased 33⁄
4
per­
cent in 2004, a bit less than in 2003. An
Productivity and Labor Costs
alternative measure is compensation per
Labor productivity rose solidly again hour in the nonfarm business sector as
last year. Output per hour in the non­ derived from compensation data in the
farm business sector increased an esti­ NIPAs. This measure of hourly compen­
mated 21⁄
2
percent over the year. This sation rose 31⁄
2
percent last year, an
increase was somewhat below the out- increase similar to that in the ECI but
sized 4 percent average pace of increase substantially less than the 51⁄
2
percent
from 2001 through 2003. Those earlier rise in 2003.
huge productivity gains were not associ­ As has been the case for several years,
ated with especially large accumulations the cost of employee benefits rose con­
of new capital equipment, as had been siderably more than did wages and sala­
the case during the late 1990s; instead, ries last year. The benefits component
to a large degree, the gains seem to of the ECI increased nearly 7 percent,
have been related to more effective use while the wages and salaries component
of capital equipment that had been posted a much more moderate 3 percent
acquired earlier and to one-time organi­ increase. The rise in hourly wages and
zational innovations induced by firms’ salaries was about the same as increases
earlier reluctance to commit to increased in the preceding two years; although
hiring. Still, last year’s 21⁄
2
percent probably boosted by last year’s higher
increase in productivity was impressive rate of price inflation, wages were likely
by long-run standards: It was in line held down by the continued, though
diminishing, labor market slack and also
Change in Output per Hour by employers’ attempts to offset con­
tinued large increases in benefits costs.
Percent, annual rate Health insurance costs continued to
rise rapidly. As measured by the ECI,
employers’ costs of health insurance,
6
which account for about 6 percent of
overall compensation costs, rose 7 per­
4
cent last year after having increased
more than 10 percent per year in 2002
2
and 2003.
1948– 1973– 1995– 2002 2004
1973 1995 2000 Prices
NOTE. Nonfarm business sector. Overall consumer prices rose notably
SOURCE. Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
Statistics. more in 2004 than they did in 2003, and

22 91st Annual Report, 2004
the sharp increase in energy prices Alternative Measures of Price Change
accounted for much of the step-up. The Percent
chain-type price index for personal
consumption expenditures (PCE) rose Price measure 2002 2003 2004
21⁄
2
percent last year, compared with an
Chain-type
increase of 13⁄
4
percent in 2003. The
Gross domestic product ........ 1.6 1.7 2.4
increase in PCE prices excluding food Gross domestic purchases ...... 1.8 1.8 2.9
Personal consumption
and energy was considerably smaller— expenditures .............. 1.8 1.7 2.5
only 11⁄
2
percent, up a little more than
Ma
E
r
x
k
c
e
l
t
u
-b
d
a
in
se
g
d
f o
P
o
C
d
E
a
e
n
x
d
c
e
lu
n
d
e
i
r
n
g
g
y . . . 1.5 1.2 1.6
1⁄ 4 percentage point from the increase food and energy ........... 1.4 1.0 1.6
in 2003. Inflation as measured by the
Fixed-weight
market-based component of core PCE Consumer price index .......... 2.2 1.9 3.4
Excluding food and energy . . . 2.0 1.2 2.1
prices—which excludes a collection of
erratic prices that are unobservable from
Note. Changes are based on quarterly averages of
market transactions and which the seasonally adjusted data.
Bureau of Economic Analysis began to Source. For chain-type measures, Department of
Commerce, Bureau of Economic Analysis; for fixed-
publish early last year—was in line with weight measures, Department of Labor, Bureau of Labor
overall core PCE inflation last year. The Statistics.
core consumer price index (CPI) rose
about 2 percent last year after having prices for residential and nonresidential
increased 11⁄
4
percent in 2003. (The CPI structures.
differs from PCE prices in a number of The jump in consumer energy prices
respects, but one factor that boosted CPI in 2004 was driven by the run-up in
inflation relative to PCE inflation last crude oil prices. The prices of both gaso­
year was a difference in the way the two line and fuel oil increased approximately
indexes measure the prices of medical 30 percent over the year, and higher oil
services, especially physicians’ services, costs accounted for the bulk of the
which rose much more rapidly in the increase. Prices of natural gas, which
CPI than in the PCE index.) The rise in can often substitute for fuel oil in the
core consumer prices was largest in the industrial sector, rose notably as well
early months of 2004: Core PCE prices last year despite the restraining influ­
increased at an annual rate of nearly ence of ample inventories. Electricity
2 percent over the first half of the year prices, which tend to reflect fuel costs
and then decelerated to a 11⁄
4
percent with a lag, also moved higher through
rate of increase in the second half. most of the year but dropped back some
The price index for GDP was less near year-end.
affected by last year’s rise in energy Consumer food prices rose around
prices than was the PCE measure; much 3 percent for a second consecutive
of the energy price increase was attribut­ year in 2004. Exports of beef dropped
able to the higher prices of imported oil, sharply last year when most of the larg­
which are excluded from GDP because est importing countries placed restric­
they are not part of domestic produc­ tions on U.S. beef after a case of mad
tion. GDP prices increased 21⁄
2
percent cow disease was discovered. Neverthe­
last year, 3⁄
4
percentage point faster less, domestic demand was sufficiently
than in 2003. In addition to the rise in strong to support consumer meat prices
PCE prices (excluding the influence of last year. Fruit and vegetable prices
imported oil), GDP prices were affected trended sideways through most of the
by a sizable increase in construction year but then rose sharply in the fall

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 23
because of crop damage associated with sharp 2003 declines. Prices of non-
the series of hurricanes that hit the energy PCE services rose about 2 per­
Southeast in August and September. cent in 2004—a smaller increase than in
In addition, prices for food away from 2003.
home, which are driven more by labor Last year’s rise in inflation showed
costs than by raw food prices, increased through to short-term measures of
more rapidly last year than in 2003. expected inflation, but longer-term mea­
Core consumer prices were influ­ sures remained stable. According to
enced by a variety of forces last year. the Michigan SRC, households’ median
Price increases were likely restrained by expectations for inflation over the next
continuing slack in labor markets and year moved up considerably in the
in some product markets, but businesses spring as inflation was rising, but then
faced considerable pressure from sev­ they eased back and ended the year near
eral sources of increased costs. First, 3 percent—up from around 21⁄
2
percent
the indirect effects of the large jump in in late 2003. In contrast, the median
energy prices fed through to businesses expectation for inflation over the next
throughout the economy and were espe­ five to ten years held about steady
cially important for firms in energy- near 23⁄
4
percent throughout this period.
intensive industries, such as those that Inflation compensation as measured
produce plastics and fertilizers. Second, by spreads between yields on nominal
prices were up sharply for a number Treasury securities and inflation-
of other industrial commodities, includ­ indexed securities—another indicator of
ing lumber and a variety of metals. expected inflation, albeit one that is also
These price increases reflected strength­ influenced by perceptions of inflation
ening economic activity abroad as well risk and perhaps also by the develop­
as in the United States. Although these ment of the market for inflation-indexed
non-oil commodities represent a small debt—showed a similar pattern. Infla­
part of businesses’ overall costs, some tion compensation over the next five
businesses likely felt the pinch of sus­ years moved up about 1⁄
2
percentage
tained price increases in these areas. point during 2004, to 21⁄
2
percent, while
Third, the declining exchange value of compensation at the five- to ten-year
the dollar boosted import prices, includ­ horizon edged lower, on net, over the
ing those of many inputs to production. year.
Finally, the deceleration in labor pro­
ductivity boosted unit labor costs after
U.S. Financial Markets
two years of declines; nevertheless, last
year’s 1 percent rise in unit labor costs Domestic financial conditions were sup­
was quite modest. portive of economic growth in 2004.
Taken together, these influences left Interest rates on longer-term Treasury
their clearest mark on the prices of securities remained low, corporate risk
goods rather than services. Core goods spreads fell, and stock prices, on bal­
prices were about unchanged, on aver­ ance, registered gains. These develop­
age, last year, but this period of stability ments occurred even as market partici­
followed a period of unusually large pants revised up their expectations for
declines in 2003. In particular, the prices the path of the federal funds rate. At
of new motor vehicles leveled off after the beginning of 2004, futures market
falling notably in 2003, and the prices quotes implied that investors expected a
of used vehicles reversed some of their 13⁄
4
percent target for the federal funds

24 91st Annual Report, 2004
Interest Rates on Selected ary and March, yields fell substantially
Treasury Securities in response to employment reports that
indicated tepid job growth. Prices of
Percent federal funds and Eurodollar futures
contracts implied that investors placed
Ten-year 6
only small odds on an increase in
5
the target funds rate before late 2004
4
and that they envisioned only moderate
Two-year 3 monetary policy tightening thereafter.
2 Longer-term interest rates and the
Three-month 1 expected path for the federal funds rate
were considerably marked up later in
2002 2003 2004 2005
the spring in response to data suggesting
NOTE. The data are daily and extend through Feb­ a pickup in aggregate demand and hir­
ruary 9, 2005.
ing, readings on core inflation that came
SOURCE. Department of the Treasury.
in above expectations, and rising oil
prices. In the statement released after its
rate at year-end, 50 basis points below May meeting, the Committee indicated
the target actually established at the that policy accommodation was likely to
FOMC meeting in December 2004. be removed at a ‘‘measured’’ pace. At
Consistent with the revision in policy its June meeting, the Committee raised
expectations, yields on two-year Trea­ the target for the federal funds rate from
sury notes increased about 11⁄
4
percent­ 1 percent to 11⁄
4
percent, but it continued
age points in 2004. Yields on longer- to assess the risks to sustainable growth
dated Treasury securities, however, and to price stability as balanced and
ended the year essentially unchanged. reiterated the ‘‘measured pace’’ lan­
Despite the run-up in oil prices, equity guage. Interest rates across the term
prices registered solid gains in 2004 structure declined somewhat immedi­
after rising sharply the year before. Risk ately after the announcement, reportedly
spreads on investment-grade corporate because some market participants had
debt declined a touch, and those on expected the FOMC to mention upside
speculative-grade debt fell more notice­ risks to growth or inflation in its
ably. Moreover, banks appreciably eased statement.
terms and standards for lending to Chairman Greenspan’s congressional
businesses. testimony in July on monetary policy,
which suggested that recent softness in
consumer spending would likely prove
Interest Rates
short lived, sparked a jump in yields
Most market interest rates rose, on bal­ on Treasury securities. However, inter­
ance, over the first half of 2004, particu­ est rates subsequently moved lower, on
larly at shorter maturities. The FOMC’s balance, as incoming data pointed to
decision at its January meeting to shift weaker spending and employment than
from a statement that monetary policy investors had expected as well as to
could remain accommodative for ‘‘a more-subdued core inflation. Apart from
considerable period’’ to an indication the August employment report, which
that it could be ‘‘patient’’ in removing seemed to hint that the economy was
policy accommodation prompted a rise emerging from its ‘‘soft patch,’’ incom­
in market interest rates. In early Febru­ ing economic news remained somewhat

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 25
lackluster through the end of the third their willingness to bear risk apparently
quarter. However, investors reportedly increased. Risk spreads on investment-
viewed FOMC statements and com­ grade corporate debt over comparable
ments by FOMC officials as more san­ Treasuries ended the year slightly below
guine on near-term prospects for the their levels at the end of 2003. Spreads
economy than they had expected. In par­ of speculative-grade yields declined
ticular, the release of the minutes from further after narrowing sharply during
the August FOMC meeting, which refer­ 2003.
enced the probable need for ‘‘significant In early 2005, market participants
cumulative tightening,’’ prompted inves­ boosted their expectations for the
tors to mark up their expectations for the path of the federal funds rate, partly in
near-term path of monetary policy. response to the publication of the min­
Short-term Treasury yields rose a bit utes of the December FOMC meeting,
further over the fall in association with which investors reportedly interpreted
actual and expected policy tightening, as pointing to greater concerns about
but long-term Treasury yields were little inflation than had been expected. Short-
changed on net. Investors’ expectations and intermediate-term Treasury yields
for the path of monetary policy firmed rose along with expectations for the
a bit more in the fourth quarter path of monetary policy, but longer-
in response to higher-than-anticipated term yields edged lower. Yields on
inflation and remarks from Federal investment- and speculative-grade cor­
Reserve officials that were reportedly porate bonds largely moved with those
interpreted as suggesting that an immi­ on comparable Treasury securities, and
nent pause in the tightening cycle was hence risk spreads remained at low
unlikely. levels.
As the economic expansion gathered
momentum and measures of corporate
Equity Markets
credit quality improved, investors’ per­
ception of risk seemed to diminish, and After surging as much as 30 percent
in 2003, broad stock market indexes
climbed modestly over the first half of
Spreads of Corporate Bond Yields over
2004. The boost to equity prices from
Comparable Off-the-Run Treasury Yields
robust earnings reports and analysts’
upward revisions for future profits
Percentage points
during this period was offset in part by
10 rising interest rates in the second quar­
High-yield 8 ter, worries about geopolitical devel­
opments, and sharply higher oil prices.
6
Stock prices dipped early in the second
BBB 4
half in response to softer economic data,
2
+ further concerns about energy prices,
AA _0
and guidance from corporations that
pointed to a less optimistic trajectory for
1997 1999 2001 2003 2005
earnings than investors had reportedly
NOTE. The data are daily and extend through
been expecting. However, as oil prices
February 9, 2005. The high-yield index is compared
with the five-year Treasury yield, and the BBB and AA pulled back toward the end of 2004 and
indexes are compared with the ten-year Treasury yield. news on the economy improved, stock
SOURCE. Merrill Lynch AA and BBB indexes and
Merrill Lynch Master II high-yield index. prices rebounded to post solid gains

26 91st Annual Report, 2004
Stock Price Indexes year before. Household and federal debt
expanded rapidly. Borrowing by non­
January 2, 2003 = 100 financial businesses was moderate,
although it picked up in the fourth
Russell 2000 160 quarter.
Commercial bank credit rose about
140
9 percent in 2004, a larger advance than
120 in the previous year. Expansion of mort­
Wilshire 5000 gage and home equity loans on banks’
100
books remained strong, as activity in
the housing market stayed robust while
2003 2004 2005 mortgage originations shifted somewhat
NOTE. The data are daily and extend through Feb­ toward adjustable-rate products. After
ruary 9, 2005. several years of runoffs, business loans
began to grow in the second quarter of
for the year. The increases were led by the year. According to survey evidence,
stocks with comparatively small market commercial banks eased terms and stan­
capitalizations; the Russell 2000 index dards on business loans as the economic
climbed 17 percent in 2004 to a record outlook improved and competition from
high. The S&P 500 and the technology- other banks and nonbank lenders inten­
laden Nasdaq advanced about 9 percent sified. Also, banks reported a pickup in
and 81⁄
2
percent respectively. To date in demand for business loans that was said
2005, equity prices have edged lower, to be driven by customers’ needs to fund
on balance, as investors have responded rising accounts receivable, inventories,
to a rebound in oil prices, lackluster capital expenditures, and mergers. After
earnings reports, cautious guidance for adjusting for certain reclassifications
future profits, and indications of contin­ of securities as loans, the growth of con­
ued monetary policy tightening. sumer loans on banks’ books remained
Expected volatility implied by options sluggish. Despite reports of increased
prices for both the Nasdaq 100 and competition among banks and nonbank
the S&P 500 declined further in 2004 intermediaries, bank profits were again
from already low levels. The difference strong in 2004. Banks experienced fur­
between the earnings–price ratio and the ther improvements in asset quality and,
real ten-year Treasury yield—a crude as a result, reduced their provisions for
measure of the premium investors loan losses.
require for holding equity shares— M2 grew at a pace roughly in line
changed little, on balance, remaining with that of nominal GDP during the
close to its average value over the past first half of 2004. A resurgence of mort­
two decades but above its level during gage refinancing spurred by the first-
the late 1990s. quarter decline in mortgage rates likely
boosted liquid deposit growth, as pro­
ceeds from refinancing were temporarily
Debt, Bank Credit, and M2
held in deposit accounts pending dis­
The aggregate debt of domestic non­ bursement to the holders of mortgage-
financial sectors is estimated to have backed securities. M2 growth slowed in
increased about 73⁄
4
percent in 2004, the second half of the year in response
somewhat faster than nominal income to a drop in mortgage refinancing activ­
but a bit slower than the pace set the ity and the increased opportunity cost of

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 27
holding M2 assets, as returns available has been on hold since August amid
on market instruments rose more than signs that housing prices and consumer
those on M2 components. For example, spending are cooling. After cutting offi­
yields on retail money market mutual cial interest rates earlier in the year, the
funds moved up more slowly than Bank of Canada raised rates in the fall
did short-term market interest rates, and in response to diminishing slack in the
assets of money funds accordingly con­ economy. The Bank of Mexico tight­
tinued to shrink. Small time deposits, ened policy throughout the year to resist
which had contracted over the previous rising inflation, and Chinese authorities
three years, resumed expansion in the made monetary policy more restrictive
second half of the year, as their yields to rein in soaring investment demand. In
began to rise in association with the the euro area and Japan, central banks
increase in other market rates. Currency kept policy interest rates unchanged in
grew at its slowest rate since 2000, 2004.
apparently reflecting sluggish demand Foreign equity price indexes recorded
by both domestic and foreign holders. moderate net gains last year after larger
On balance, M2 growth from the fourth increases in 2003. Equity markets
quarter of 2003 to the fourth quarter of started the year strong, but prices
2004 was about 51⁄
4
percent. The veloc­ declined in the spring as interest rates
ity of M2 rose 1 percent, on net, roughly rose. The run-up in oil prices between
in line with the historical relationships July and October appeared to weigh
among money, income, and opportunity on foreign equity prices, but the subse­
cost. quent decline in oil prices helped sup­
port a rise in equity prices late in the
year. Foreign long-term interest rates
International Developments
declined, on net, during 2004. Rates
Foreign economic activity expanded in rose in the second quarter as new data
2004 at a faster pace than in the preced­ (including reports from the United
ing three years. The pickup in growth States) that showed faster growth and
was widespread—global manufactur­ higher inflation led market participants
ing and trade rebounded across indus­ to expect more-aggressive monetary
trial and emerging economies, in part tightening. However, foreign long-term
because of strong demand from the interest rates slipped after midyear,
United States and China. In the second when foreign growth slowed and for­
half of the year, trade and foreign GDP eign currencies appreciated against the
growth slowed, partly as a result of dollar. Over the first half of the year,
higher oil prices and the appreciation of spreads on internationally issued sover­
some foreign currencies against the dol­ eign debt of emerging-market econo­
lar. The run-up in oil prices and other mies over U.S. Treasuries moved up
commodity prices contributed to higher, somewhat from low levels, but spreads
though still moderate, inflation across more than reversed those increases in
industrial and emerging economies. the second half.
Monetary policy in many foreign The path of the exchange rate was
economies tightened over the course uneven over the course of 2004. The
of 2004. Citing high rates of capacity dollar rose slightly in the first half of the
utilization and mounting inflationary year on perceptions that monetary pol­
pressures, the Bank of England raised its icy would tighten more quickly in the
target interest rate 100 basis points but United States than abroad. Beginning in

28 91st Annual Report, 2004
Spread on Internationally Issued Sovereign pound, and the Canadian dollar. The dol­
Debt of Emerging-Market Economies lar declined 4 percent, on net, against
the Japanese yen and 13 percent against
Percentage points the Korean won, but some other Asian
central banks, most notably the People’s
10 Bank of China, kept their currencies
stable against the dollar. So far in 2005,
8
the dollar has rebounded, with market
6 commentary focusing on the positive
differential between U.S. economic
4
growth and that in Europe and Japan.
2002 2003 2004 2005
Industrial Economies
NOTE. The data are weekly averages. The last
observation is the average of trading days through
After increasing strongly in the first
February 9, 2005. The series shown is the spread of the
yield of certain dollar-denominated sovereign debt quarter, Japanese GDP growth stagnated
instruments of emerging-market economies over U.S. in the remainder of 2004. Growth in
Treasury securities; over the period shown, the index
exports and business investment slowed
encompassed nineteen countries.
SOURCE. J.P. Morgan Emerging Market Bond Index over the year, and government invest­
Plus (EMBI+). ment contracted. However, corporate
profits and balance sheets improved, and
labor market conditions also brightened,
September, however, the dollar resumed with the job-offers-to-applicants ratio
the depreciation that had started in 2002, rising to a twelve-year high. Consumer
as market participants focused on the prices continued to decline in 2004,
financing implications of the large and though only slightly. In contrast, higher
growing U.S. current account deficit. In commodity prices helped push twelve­
2004, the dollar depreciated about 7 per­ month wholesale price inflation up to
cent, on net, against the euro, the U.K. 2 percent late in the year, its highest rate
since 1990. The yield on the ten-year
bellwether government bond rose from
U.S. Dollar Exchange Rate against
its June 2003 record low of about 1⁄
2
per­
Selected Major Currencies cent to nearly 2 percent in midyear
before retreating to about 11⁄
2
percent
Week ending January 4, 2002 = 100 recently. After making substantial sales
of yen for dollars in the first quarter,
Canadian
dollar 100 Japanese authorities ceased interven­
tion in mid-March and remained on the
Japanese
yen 90 sidelines even as the yen appreciated
significantly against the dollar in the
Euro 80
fall.
70 Economic conditions in the euro area
U.K.
pound firmed during the first half of 2004 but
2002 2003 2004 2005 weakened in the second half. Private
NOTE. The data are weekly and are in foreign consumption and investment spending
currency units per dollar. The last observation for each continued to rise, but export growth
series is the average of trading days through February 9,
slowed after midyear. German GDP
2005.
SOURCE. Bloomberg L.P. growth slowed to a crawl in the second

Economic and Financial Developments in 2004 and Early 2005 29
half, as German consumer spending Emerging-Market Economies
remained anemic, held down by a weak
labor market and low consumer confi­ Growth of real GDP in China remained
dence. In contrast, French GDP growth very robust in 2004, supported by strong
was strong in the fourth quarter. The domestic demand and exports. The
euro-area unemployment rate has been Chinese government took steps early in
near 9 percent since rising to that level the year to slow investment spending,
in early 2003. Inflation for the euro area curbing investment approvals and lend­
remained just above the European Cen­ ing. Investment growth slowed signifi­
tral Bank’s medium-term goal of less cantly but remained rapid. At the same
than, but close to, 2 percent. time, indicators of personal consump­
With the exception of a slowdown in tion spending strengthened, and Chinese
the third quarter, economic expansion in exports and imports continued to soar in
the United Kingdom stayed strong dur­ 2004. Consumer price inflation peaked
ing 2004, largely because of the brisk at a twelve-month change of more than
growth of consumption and government 5 percent in July but has fallen since
spending. Labor markets remained tight then to less than 3 percent, as food
in 2004; the unemployment rate ticked prices have moderated. Inflation exclud­
down to its lowest level in almost three ing food is only about 1 percent.
decades, and labor earnings posted solid Supported by exports to China, eco­
gains. Consumer price inflation over the nomic growth in other Asian emerging-
twelve months ending in December was market economies was generally strong
11⁄
2
percent, below the central bank’s in 2004. Economic expansion in Korea
official target rate of 2 percent. Housing remained heavily dependent on external
price rises slowed sharply from rapid demand because high levels of con­
rates and were muted during the second sumer debt continued to weigh on con­
half of 2004. Household net mortgage sumption spending. Inflation across
borrowing declined to a level 20 percent emerging Asia, though still moderate,
below its 2003 peak. was pushed up by higher energy prices
The Canadian economy expanded at and strong aggregate demand.
a healthy pace throughout 2004. Sizable The Mexican economy grew rapidly
gains in consumption and investment in the first half of the year in response to
boosted output throughout the year. strong demand from the United States.
Export growth, supported by demand In the third quarter, Mexican GDP
from the United States, was strong in growth slowed somewhat, as manufac­
the first half of the year but stagnated in turing exports stagnated, but domestic
the second half as U.S. manufacturing demand remained buoyant. Increases
growth slowed and the Canadian dol­ in energy and food prices pushed up
lar’s appreciation hurt Canadian trade. twelve-month consumer price inflation
The unemployment rate declined mod­ to more than 5 percent, above the Bank
erately over the year, and employment of Mexico’s target range of 2 percent
posted strong gains. Consumer price to 4 percent. Monetary policy tightened
inflation has settled at about 2 percent, throughout the year, and inflation
the midpoint of the Bank of Canada’s began to fall near year-end. Oil revenues
inflation target range, whereas inflation boosted the Mexican public-sector fiscal
excluding food, energy, and indirect surplus and allowed Mexican govern­
taxes declined to around 11⁄
2
percent by ment spending to provide stimulus while
year-end. still meeting fiscal targets.

30 91st Annual Report, 2004
In Brazil, economic activity con­ Concerns over inflation pressures have
tinued to expand robustly in 2004. prompted the central bank to tighten
Domestic demand was supported by the monetary policy since September.
monetary loosening that occurred in the In Argentina, the economic recovery
second half of 2003 and early 2004. picked up steam last year, as exports
Export growth was boosted by demand were supported by strong demand for
for commodities and the recovery commodities. The country continues,
in Argentina. Brazilian asset prices however, to grapple with difficult
declined through May on expectations structural problems. After more than
that higher global interest rates would three years in default, the government
make it more difficult for the Brazilian launched a debt swap in January with
government to finance its debt, but stock the goal of restructuring more than
prices have moved up sharply since $80 billion in defaulted bonds.
May, and the currency has appreciated.

31
Monetary Policy Report of July 2004
Monetary Policy and the and industrial materials. In addition, the
Economic Outlook decline in the foreign exchange value
of the dollar in 2003 put upward pres­
The economic expansion in the United
sure on the prices of imported goods and
States became increasingly well estab­
services. With strong demand in the
lished in the first half of 2004, but the
United States and increased utilization
pace of inflation picked up from its
of the productive capacity of the econ­
very low rate in 2003. At the time of the
omy, firms were better able to pass on
February Monetary Policy Report to the
the higher costs of imports, raise the
Congress, considerable evidence was
prices of domestically produced items
already in hand indicating that the U.S.
that compete with imports, and in many
economy had made the transition from
cases boost their profit margins. Likely
a period of subpar growth to one of
in response to the faster rate of price
more-vigorous expansion. Nevertheless,
increases experienced this year, surveys
job creation remained limited, and gains
suggest that near-term inflation expec­
in investment, although sizable, still
tations have moved up somewhat; still,
seemed restrained by a lingering caution
expectations for price inflation over the
on the part of some businesses. In the
longer term have remained in their
event, businesses stepped up their hir­
recent range.
ing in the spring, and capital spending
Monetary policy was very accommo­
seems to have continued apace.
dative at the start of 2004 as the Fed­
Over the first half of this year, energy
eral Open Market Committee (FOMC)
prices soared; moreover, inflation in
sought to provide continuing support to
core consumer prices—as measured by
an economic expansion that had yet to
the price index for personal consump­
produce a sustained improvement in the
tion expenditures excluding the direct
labor market and to ensure that the pre­
effects of movements in food and energy
vious year’s threat of an unwelcome
prices—increased from an exceptionally
disinflation would continue to recede.
low rate of 1 percent over the four quar­
Although real GDP had accelerated
ters of 2003 to an annual rate of a little
sharply in the second half of 2003, the
more than 2 percent. To some extent, the
incoming data through the time of the
upturn in core inflation reflected the
March meeting suggested that employ­
indirect effects of higher energy prices,
ment was growing only slowly, as
but other forces also played a role.
employers were relying on increased
Strengthening aggregate demand both at
production efficiencies to satisfy consid­
home and abroad induced a surge in the
erable gains in aggregate demand. Surg­
prices of many primary commodities
ing oil prices were boosting overall
inflation, while core inflation—though
Note. The discussion in this section consists no longer declining—was still low. With
of the text and tables from the Monetary Policy subsequent labor market reports sug­
Report submitted to the Congress on July 20,
gesting that hiring was on a stronger
2004; the charts from this report (as well as earlier
track, growth in output continuing at a
reports) are available on the Board’s web site, at
www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/hh. solid pace, and core consumer price

32 91st Annual Report, 2004
inflation possibly running higher, the in core inflation in the first half of 2004
FOMC announced in May that it saw are likely to prove transitory. In particu­
the risks to the goal of price stability as lar, the upward impetus from the rise in
having moved into balance. Even so, the energy and commodity prices is likely
Committee stated that it believed that to lessen in coming quarters. For another
the monetary policy accommodation reason, the evidence suggests that the
then in place could be ‘‘removed at a productive capacity of the economy is
pace that is likely to be measured.’’ still not being fully used and that the
Indeed, at its June meeting, the FOMC attendant slack is probably exerting
decided that sufficient evidence was in some downward pressure on inflation.
hand to begin moving the federal funds If—as seems likely—the economy
rate back toward a more neutral setting approaches full utilization of its produc­
and raised the federal funds rate 1⁄
4
per­ tive capacity only gradually, that down­
centage point to 11⁄
4
percent, a decision ward pressure should persist for a time.
that was widely anticipated by market Moreover, productivity remains on a
participants. solid uptrend and should continue to
Although some of the recent data restrain costs. To date, the gains in pro­
have been on the soft side, the avail­ ductivity have helped to boost profit
able information on the outlook for margins. As firms compete to take
the U.S. economy is, on balance, posi­ advantage of profit opportunities, they
tive. Households are enjoying a gen­ may eventually be forced to absorb a
erally improving job market, rising portion of any increases in labor and
real incomes, and greater wealth, all of other costs that occur. But history sug­
which are providing them with the con­ gests that the absorption of costs has
fidence and wherewithal to spend. In the limits. Indeed, unit labor costs have
business sector, capital spending appar­ turned up of late, as productivity growth
ently is continuing to increase briskly, has slowed below the rate of increase in
bolstered by expectations of strong sales hourly compensation. If increases in
as well as by booming profits and those costs were to develop any upward
supportive financial conditions; invest­ momentum, the well-behaved nature
ment should also continue to be buoyed of inflation in recent years could be
by firms’ adoption of productivity- jeopardized.
enhancing technologies. Moreover,
inventories appear to be lean relative to
Monetary Policy, Financial
sales even after taking account of the
Markets, and the Economy
substantial improvements firms have
over the First Half of 2004
made in managing their stocks, suggest­
ing that stockbuilding may provide At the beginning of 2004, the FOMC
some impetus to production in the near was growing more confident that the
term. The brightening outlook for eco­ economic expansion was likely to be
nomic activity abroad suggests that self-sustaining, particularly in light of
demand for U.S. exports should grow the significant firming of business out­
and provide a further lift to domestic lays and the continued strength in house­
production. hold spending. Moreover, stimulative
The prospects also seem favorable for fiscal and monetary policies, in conjunc­
inflation to remain contained in the tion with receptive financial markets,
period ahead. For one reason, some of appeared likely to provide substantial
the forces that contributed to the upturn support to economic activity and to ward

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 33
off any further disinflation. However, At the May FOMC meeting, members
the Committee remained concerned noted a distinct improvement in the eco­
about the persistent weakness in the nomic outlook. The labor market figures
labor market. At its January meeting, reported for March had proved to be
the FOMC left the target for the federal strong, and the reports for the two pre­
funds rate at 1 percent. The Committee vious months had been revised upward
generally felt that the apparent slack in significantly. Consumer price inflation
labor and product markets and contin­ in the first quarter of the year was faster
ued strong productivity growth were than it had been in the previous quarter.
likely to keep the underlying trend in Although much of this rise was due to
inflation subdued, but it nevertheless escalating energy costs, core inflation
was cognizant that a highly accommo­ also stepped up, and survey-based mea­
dative stance for monetary policy could sures of near-term inflation expectations
not be maintained indefinitely. Given had edged higher. In response to the
these considerations, the Committee indications of rising aggregate demand
modified the language of its policy state­ and a strengthening job market, yields
ment to gain greater flexibility to firm on Treasury securities had risen appre­
policy should circumstances warrant. ciably. Accordingly, the Committee was
The Committee achieved this added of the view that the expansion would be
flexibility by removing its assessment vigorous and believed that the odds of
that monetary policy would be accom­ any further disinflation had been sub­
modative for ‘‘a considerable period’’ stantially reduced. On the basis of the
and instead saying that the Committee evolving outlook for economic activity
could be ‘‘patient’’ in removing its pol­ and prices, the Committee revised its
icy accommodation. assessment of risks to indicate that the
At the time of the March FOMC upside and downside risks for inflation
meeting, the Committee believed that had moved into balance. To underscore
conditions were mostly in place for fur­ its belief that policy would probably
ther solid economic growth. Industrial soon need to move toward a more neu­
production had picked up broadly, and tral stance while emphasizing that this
consumer and business spending contin­ process was not expected to be rapid,
ued to expand briskly. However, the the Committee stated its judgment that
employment reports for January and Feb­ monetary policy accommodation ‘‘can
ruary still painted a picture of subdued be removed at a pace that is likely to be
hiring. With financial markets quite measured.’’
accommodative, the Committee recog­ At the time of the June FOMC meet­
nized that maintaining the current stance ing, incoming information tended to
of policy could fuel inflation pressures confirm that the economy was expand­
and perhaps encourage excessive risk- ing at a solid pace but also indicated
taking by financial market participants. that inflation was higher than had been
The Committee concluded that the low anticipated. Quotes on near-term money
level of core consumer price inflation market futures and options suggested
and continued evidence of weak hiring that market participants were nearly cer­
argued for the retention of both its 1 per­ tain of an increase of 25 basis points in
cent target for the federal funds rate the target for the federal funds rate at
and the wording in its statement that that meeting and had priced in a cumu­
the Committee could be ‘‘patient’’ with lative increase of about 21⁄
4
percentage
respect to changes in monetary policy. points in the federal funds rate over the

34 91st Annual Report, 2004
next year. The Committee agreed that Economic Projections for 2004 and 2005
the current substantial degree of policy
Percent
accommodation was no longer war­
ranted and decided to increase its target Federal Reserve Governors
and
for the federal funds rate 25 basis points. Reserve Bank presidents
Indicator
The Committee noted that it considered
the risks to both sustainable economic Range Central
tendency
growth and stable prices to be roughly
balanced and maintained its appraisal 2004
that policy accommodation ‘‘can be
removed at a pace that is likely to be Change, fourth quarter
to fourth quarter1
measured’’ but also emphasized that it Nominal GDP ............ 6–7 61⁄4–63⁄4
will ‘‘respond to changes in economic Real GDP ................ 4–43⁄4 41⁄2–43⁄4
PCE price index excluding
prospects as needed to fulfill its obliga­ food and energy ...... 11⁄2–2 13⁄4–2
tion to maintain price stability.’’
Average level,
fourth quarter
Civilian unemployment
Economic Projections rate .................. 51⁄4–51⁄2 51⁄4–51⁄2
for 2004 and 2005
2005
In conjunction with the FOMC meeting
Change, fourth quarter
at the end of June, the members of the
to fourth quarter1
Board of Governors and the Federal Nominal GDP ............ 43⁄4–61⁄2 51⁄4–6
Reserve Bank presidents, all of whom
R
PC
ea
E
l G
pr
D
ic
P
e in
..
d
.
e
.
x
. .
e
.
x
.
c
.
l
.
u
.
d
.
i
.
n
.
g
. . 31⁄2–4 31⁄2–4
participate in the deliberations of the food and energy ...... 11⁄2–21⁄2 11⁄2–2
FOMC, were asked to provide economic Average level,
projections for 2004 and 2005. The cen­ fourth quarter
Civilian unemployment
tral tendency of the FOMC participants’ rate .................. 5–51⁄2 5–51⁄4
forecasts for the increase in real GDP is
1. Change from average for fourth quarter of previous
41⁄
2
percent to 43⁄
4
percent over the four
year to average for fourth quarter of year indicated.
quarters of 2004 and 31⁄
2
percent to
4 percent in 2005. The civilian unem­
ployment rate is expected to lie between pants expect it to lie between 13⁄
4
per­
51⁄
4
percent and 51⁄
2
percent in the cent and 2 percent. For 2005, the central
fourth quarter of 2004 and to decline to tendency of the projections for core PCE
between 5 percent and 51⁄
4
percent by inflation is 11⁄
2
percent to 2 percent.
the fourth quarter of 2005.
Starting with this report, the Federal
Economic and Financial
Reserve will provide projections for the
Developments in 2004
price index for personal consumption
expenditures excluding food and energy After having surged in the second half
(core PCE), which the Committee of 2003, economic activity continued to
believes is better as an indicator of expand at a solid pace in the first half
underlying inflation trends than is the of 2004. In the labor market, payroll
overall PCE price measure previously employment started to increase last fall
featured. Core PCE inflation appears to after a long string of declines and picked
have run a little above an annual rate of up further during the first half of
2 percent in the first half of 2004; for this year. Headline inflation has been
2004 as a whole, most FOMC partici- boosted significantly by the jump in

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 35
energy prices this year, but core infla­ ings, rose appreciably in nominal terms.
tion has also moved up from the excep­ In addition, last year’s tax legislation,
tionally low levels of late 2003. which had already reduced withhold­
ing rates in mid-2003, added further
to households’ cash flow by increasing
The Household Sector
refunds and lowering final settlements
this spring.
Consumer Spending
Household wealth increased only
Consumer spending, which had gath­ about in line with nominal DPI in the
ered a good bit of steam in the second first quarter of 2004, and the wealth-to­
half of 2003, continued to move higher income ratio was likely little changed in
in the first half of 2004. The growth in the second quarter as well. Nonetheless,
spending was spurred by substantial the increase in wealth over the past year
gains in income. In addition, household has been considerable—and probably
wealth has risen sharply over the past large enough to more or less offset
year, and consumer surveys indicate that any lingering restraint on spending
individuals are generally upbeat in their growth from the earlier declines in stock
assessments of the economy’s prospects prices. Thus, with wealth approximately
and of their own situations. a neutral influence on the growth of
Personal consumption expenditures spending of late, the personal saving
rose at an annual rate of 33⁄
4
percent in rate has held fairly steady. In fact, the
real terms in the first quarter. Spending average saving rate over the first five
on light motor vehicles, which had been months of the year—at 21⁄
4
percent of
supported in late 2003 by aggressive DPI—was very close to the annual fig­
price and financing incentives, slipped ures for 2002 and 2003.
somewhat in early 2004. But outlays for
goods other than motor vehicles, which
Residential Investment
had risen 61⁄
2
percent in real terms in
2003, posted another huge increase in Activity in the housing sector remained
the first quarter; spending on services torrid in the first half of 2004. Although
also perked up after having advanced starts in the single-family sector faltered
only modestly in 2003. The available a bit early in the year, in part because of
data point to a much smaller increase in unusually adverse weather, they subse­
consumer spending in the second quar­ quently snapped back and reached an
ter; the deceleration mainly reflects a annual rate of more than 1.6 million
sharp slowing in the growth of outlays units in April and May—81⁄
2
percent
on goods other than motor vehicles. greater than the already rapid pace for
Real disposable personal income 2003 as a whole. Sales of new and exist­
(DPI)—that is, after-tax income adjusted ing homes have also been exceptionally
for inflation—rose at an annual rate of strong, and they hit record highs in May.
nearly 4 percent between the fourth In general, housing activity has been
quarter of 2003 and May 2004, a gain supported by the favorable develop­
about in line with its rate of growth last ments regarding jobs and income and,
year. To be sure, the rise in energy prices especially early in the year, by low mort­
cut into the growth of real income in the gage rates. Rates on thirty-year fixed-
first half of the year. However, aggre­ rate mortgages, which had dipped to
gate wages and salaries, boosted by 51⁄
2
percent in March, rose markedly in
increases in both employment and earn­ the spring; they have edged down in

36 91st Annual Report, 2004
recent weeks and now stand at 6 per­ of the year and at roughly a 4 percent
cent, a level still quite low by historical pace in April and May. The growth of
standards. consumer credit likely has continued to
Home prices have continued to rise be restrained by the substitution toward
rapidly. For example, the national mortgage debt as a means to finance
repeat-sales price index from the household expenditures.
Office of Federal Housing Enterprise Low interest rates, in concert with
Oversight—which partially adjusts for strong growth in disposable personal
shifts in the quality of homes sold—rose income, have helped to keep financial
73⁄
4
percent over the year ending in the obligations manageable for most house­
first quarter (the latest available data), holds. In the first quarter of the year, the
a rate similar to the average annual gain debt service ratio and the financial obli­
since late 2000. By this measure—and gations ratio for the household sector in
many others—house price increases the aggregate, both of which gauge pre-
have outstripped gains in incomes as committed expenditures relative to dis­
well as in rents in recent years. posable income, continued to edge down
Starts in the multifamily sector aver­ from their peaks in 2001. Other indica­
aged an annual rate of 360,000 units tors also suggest that the financial well­
over the first five months of the year, a being of households has stabilized and
pace slightly faster than that of the past may be improving. Delinquencies on
several years. Low interest rates have credit card and auto loans generally
apparently helped maintain the profit­ declined in the first three months of the
ability of apartment construction, given year, and bankruptcy rates, while still
that other fundamental determinants of high, stepped down in the first quarter
activity in the sector have been weak: In from their recent peak.
particular, rents have remained soft, and Rapid increases in home prices have
in the first quarter, vacancy rates for continued to buoy household net worth
multifamily rental properties reached a this year. In contrast, stock prices are
new high. about unchanged. Although news on
earnings and economic activity has
generally been favorable, rising oil
Household Finance
prices and interest rates and, perhaps,
Household debt rose at an annual rate of heightened geopolitical concerns have
about 103⁄
4
percent in the first quarter of weighed on investor sentiment. Never­
2004. The especially rapid growth of theless, inflows into equity mutual funds
mortgage debt was driven by the strong have been even stronger thus far in 2004
pace of activity in the housing market than they were last year.
and the renewed wave of mortgage refi­
nancing. However, the second-quarter
The Business Sector
rise in interest rates appears to have
slowed the rate of refinancing and, con­
Fixed Investment
sequently, the amount of equity being
extracted from the value of homes For the most part, businesses appear to
through such transactions. Consumer be shaking off the extraordinary reluc­
credit—which constitutes the bulk of tance to undertake new investment
household debt aside from mortgage projects that was evident in 2002 and
borrowing—expanded at an annual rate 2003. Indeed, although outlays on non­
of about 6 percent over the first quarter residential construction have not yet

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 37
turned up decisively, real spending on nontransportation equipment have been
equipment and software (E&S) has been a bit soft recently. But the May level of
advancing briskly. The broadly based shipments for this broad category was
growth in E&S spending has been still above that of the first quarter, and
driven by increasingly favorable funda­ backlogs of unfilled orders, which have
mentals: positive expectations for sales, risen impressively over the past year,
high levels of corporate profits and cash continued to build.
flow, a desire to replace or upgrade Real nonresidential construction has
aging equipment after a period of weak remained about unchanged, on net, since
investment spending, and the continued the steep decline in 2001 and 2002.
low cost of capital. Construction of office buildings is still
Real E&S spending rose at an annual running at roughly half the pace of
rate of more than 15 percent in the sec­ 2000, although vacancy rates have
ond half of last year, and it posted stabilized—albeit at very high levels—
another sizable increase in the first quar­ and the decline in rents has slowed. Fac­
ter of 2004 despite flat business pur­ tory construction also remains sluggish.
chases of motor vehicles and a dip in Construction of retail and wholesale
deliveries of aircraft. Excluding trans­ facilities, in contrast, has held up fairly
portation equipment, real spending on well, a performance consistent with the
E&S rose at an annual rate of 131⁄
2
per­ strength in consumer spending. Outlays
cent in the first quarter. In the high-tech on buildings for health care and edu­
category, real purchases of computers cation also have been reasonably well
and software remained on the solid sustained.
uptrend that has been evident for the
past couple of years, and real outlays on
Inventory Investment
communications equipment increased
further, reaching a level about 20 per­ Inventory investment has generally
cent above the low in the fourth quarter remained subdued even as final sales
of 2002. Spending for equipment other have strengthened. Although real non­
than high-tech and transportation, which farm inventory investment picked up to
accounts for about 40 percent of E&S an annual rate of $30 billion in the first
(measured in nominal terms), also rose quarter, the accumulation occurred
markedly in the first quarter. Such almost entirely in the motor vehicle sec­
spending tends to be particularly sen­ tor, in which sagging sales and a high
sitive to the prospects for aggregate level of production early in the year
demand. In addition, it may be receiving created a noticeable bulge in dealer
a lift from the partial-expensing tax pro­ stocks, especially of light trucks. In the
vision, which is especially valuable for second quarter, the automakers reduced
equipment with relatively long service assemblies; but with sales running only
lives for tax purposes; that provision is a little above their first-quarter pace on
slated to expire at the end of 2004. average, inventories of motor vehicles
Equipment spending appears to have remained elevated. Outside the motor
posted another solid increase in the sec­ vehicle industry, nonfarm inventories
ond quarter. Outlays on transportation increased at a meager $6 billion annual
equipment seem to have rebounded, and rate in real terms in the first quarter, and
the incoming data on high-tech equip­ the available data point to only a moder­
ment point to robust real expenditures. ate step-up in real stockbuilding, on bal­
Some indicators for spending on other ance, in April and May. In general, non­

38 91st Annual Report, 2004
auto inventories appear lean relative to investment-grade bonds in particular
sales, even after factoring in the down­ was influenced by movements in inter­
ward trend in inventory–sales ratios that est rates; issuance spiked in March in
has accompanied the ongoing improve­ the wake of the drop in yields but sub­
ments in supply-chain and logistics sided in April as rates rebounded. Short-
management. term debt financing showed signs of
turning around after contracting over
the previous three years. Commercial
Corporate Profits
paper outstanding expanded in the first
and Business Finance
two quarters of 2004. Business loans at
Continuing the gains of last year, profits banks have fallen on balance so far this
of the business sector to date have year but at a much slower pace than in
remained strong. In the first quarter of 2003. The Federal Reserve’s Senior
2004, earnings per share for S&P 500 Loan Officer Opinion Survey conducted
firms were about 26 percent higher than in April 2004 indicated that demand for
their level four quarters earlier, and business loans had begun to expand and
before-tax profits of nonfinancial cor­ that commercial banks had again eased
porations as a share of GDP from that both standards and terms on these loans
sector edged up following a steep over the previous three months.
increase in 2003. A jump in profits in Strong profits, low interest rates, and
the petroleum and gas industries owing continued deleveraging helped improve
to higher oil prices was responsible for the credit quality of nonfinancial firms
much of the rise in earnings. However, over the first half of the year. In the
firms across many industries, with the second quarter, the delinquency rate on
notable exception of telecommunication business loans dropped for the sixth con­
services, registered solid gains in earn­ secutive quarter; the continued decline
ings. In response to this pattern of higher has reversed a large part of the preced­
profits, analysts have been steadily ing run-up. Early in the year the twelve­
marking up their forecasts for earnings month trailing default rate on outstand­
in subsequent quarters. ing bonds fell into the relatively low
Net equity issuance has remained range observed over much of the 1990s,
negative this year. Seasoned offerings and in June it registered another decline.
have been scarce, the pace of initial Moreover, in the first part of the year,
public offerings has only inched up, and the pace of upgrades of bond ratings by
share retirements have continued to be Moody’s Investors Service rose while
strong. Corporations have continued to the pace of downgrades fell.
repurchase shares at a rapid rate to man­ Borrowing against commercial real
age their cash positions, even as they estate assets continued at a rapid pace
have increased dividend payments. during the first half of this year. Anec­
Firms relied heavily on their elevated dotal reports suggest that some firms
profits and substantial cash holdings to were using mortgages on commercial
finance their investment in inventories property to lock in low-cost, long-term
and fixed capital in the first half of funding. Despite the persistently high
2004. As a result, the growth of nonfi­ vacancy rates for most types of commer­
nancial business debt remained modest. cial property, the loans backed by these
Much of the proceeds from bond issu­ assets have continued to perform well.
ance was used to pay down higher-cost Delinquency rates on commercial mort­
debt, and the timing of the issuance of gages held by banks and insurance com­

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 39
panies remained very low in the first further as well. Spending on the major
quarter. A drop in delinquencies on health programs rose at a rapid clip,
commercial-mortgage-backed securities in part because the Jobs and Growth
(CMBS) in recent months has partially Tax Relief Reconciliation Act of 2003
reversed last year’s rise, and the narrow (JGTRRA) temporarily increased grants
risk spreads on CMBS suggest that to the states under the Medicaid pro­
investors have limited concerns about gram and boosted payments to some
loan quality. Medicare providers. In addition, as
noted, net interest payments, which had
plummeted between 1997 and 2003,
The Government Sector
flattened out. Real federal expenditures
for consumption and gross investment—
Federal Government
the part of government spending that is
The deficit in the federal unified budget a component of real GDP—rose at an
has continued to widen. Over the twelve annual rate of 81⁄
2
percent in the first
months ending in June, the unified bud­ calendar quarter of 2004; that increase
get recorded a deficit of $431 billion, reflected a surge in real defense spend­
$120 billion more than during the com­ ing, which now stands more than 30 per­
parable period last year and equal to cent above the levels that prevailed, on
nearly 4 percent of nominal GDP. In average, from 1997 to 2000.
large part, the rise in the deficit is attrib­ Federal receipts in the twelve months
utable to further rapid increases in ending in June were 11⁄
2
percent higher
spending on defense and other programs than during the comparable period of
and the loss of revenues resulting from the previous year after having fallen
the tax legislation enacted in recent markedly between fiscal 2000 and fiscal
years. In addition, interest costs, which 2003. Receipts received a substantial
fell sharply between fiscal 1997 and fis­ boost over the past year from a strong
cal 2003 as a result of budget surpluses gain in corporate taxes, which were
and declining interest rates, have leveled lifted by robust profits. Social insurance
off and thus are no longer a significant taxes, which tend to move in line with
factor helping to restrain the deficit. The wages and salaries, also increased. But
primary deficit, which excludes net individual income taxes were below last
interest, totaled $276 billion over the year’s level: Although taxable incomes
twelve months ending in June, also rose moderately, collections were
approximately $120 billion more than reduced by the lower withholding rates
over the year ending in June 2003. in place since mid-2003 and by the
Over the twelve months ending in effects of JGTRRA on refunds and final
June, nominal federal spending was settlements this spring.
nearly 7 percent higher than during the The deterioration in the unified bud­
same period a year earlier and stood at get since 2000 has been mirrored in a
about 20 percent of nominal GDP— sharp downswing in federal saving—
virtually the same as in fiscal 2003 but essentially, the unified surplus or deficit
11⁄
2
percentage points above the recent adjusted to conform to the account­
low in fiscal 2000. Spurred by the war ing practices followed in the national
in Iraq, defense spending ramped up income and product accounts (NIPA).
another 14 percent; outlays for non­ Gross federal saving fell from a high
defense discretionary programs, which of nearly 3 percent of nominal GDP in
include homeland security, moved up 2000 to negative 3 percent of GDP in

40 91st Annual Report, 2004
the first quarter of 2004; measured net have continued to put upward pres­
of estimated depreciation, federal saving sure on spending, state and local gov­
fell from 2 percent of GDP to nega­ ernments have generally held the line
tive 4 percent of GDP over this period. on hiring and have kept other outlays
In the past couple of years, the rise in in check. The restraint on spending,
business saving from the rebound in in combination with a drawdown of
profits and reductions in corporate taxes reserve funds and some increases in
has cushioned to some extent the effect taxes, has helped states and localities
of growing budget deficits on national satisfy their balanced-budget require­
saving. In fact, because of the dramatic ments. In fact, between the third quarter
increase in business saving in recent of 2003 and the first quarter of 2004,
quarters, national saving has recovered NIPA net saving (excluding social insur­
some from the extreme lows of early ance funds) for this sector averaged
2003. Even so, as of the first quarter of $21 billion at an annual rate (1⁄
4
percent
2004, national saving (measured net of of nominal GDP), compared with nega­
estimated depreciation) was still equal tive $7 billion in 2002 and negative
to just about 21⁄
2
percent of GDP, com­ $31 billion in the first half of 2003. (Net
pared with a recent high of 61⁄
2
percent saving is roughly similar to the sur­
in 1998. If not reversed over the longer plus or deficit in an operating budget.)
haul, such low levels of national saving Although a few states are still struggling
could eventually impinge on private with strained fiscal situations, most have
capital formation and thus slow the rise entered fiscal 2005 (which started on
of living standards. July 1 in all but four states) with expec­
Reflecting the need to finance the siz­ tations of respectable growth in reve­
able federal budget deficit, federal debt nues and with budgets in place that
held by the public expanded at an annual allow for some increases in spending on
rate of 113⁄
4
percent in the first half high-priority services and some rebuild­
of the year. The ratio of this debt to ing of reserve funds.
nominal GDP now exceeds 36 percent. Real consumption and investment
The Treasury tilted its issuance toward spending by state and local governments
longer-term and inflation-indexed secu­ was essentially flat in the first quarter
rities somewhat, and announced semian­ of 2004; available indicators point to a
nual issuance of a twenty-year inflation- moderate increase in the second quarter.
protected bond beginning in July and a Outlays for consumption items, which
five-year inflation-protected note begin­ were little changed in 2003, appear to
ning in October. have remained subdued throughout the
first half of the year. Investment expen­
ditures also were about unchanged in
State and Local Governments
the first quarter, but they turned up
States and localities have started to see sharply in the spring, mainly because of
some improvement in their budget posi­ a jump in spending on highways.
tions after having gone through several Significant demand for infrastructure
difficult years. Strong growth in house­ spending and favorable interest rates led
hold income and consumer spending has to robust issuance of state and local
boosted revenues in recent quarters, as government debt to finance capital
have the additional federal grants autho­ expenditures and to advance refund
rized under JGTRRA. And although higher-cost debt. Nevertheless, over the
rising medical costs and security needs first half of the year, net issuance edged

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 41
down from its rapid pace in 2003 to the blistering 20 percent pace of the
about a 6 percent annual rate. The decel­ fourth quarter but still above the average
eration reflected a decline in short-term for 2003. Solid gains in exports since
borrowing as improvements in the fiscal mid-2003 arose in part from the strong
positions of state and local governments economic performance of many of our
lessened the need for temporary funding major trading partners. In addition, the
of budget shortfalls. net decline in the exchange value of
The credit quality of municipal bor­ the dollar since 2002 continued to make
rowers has stabilized after two years U.S. goods and services more com­
of deterioration; for the year to date, petitive abroad. Increases in exports of
upgrades and downgrades of credit rat­ U.S. goods were widespread across our
ings have been roughly equal. In a major trading partners, with the excep­
marked change from last year’s senti­ tion of Japan, and were concentrated
ment, rating agencies have begun to in real exports of capital goods, indus­
express guarded optimism about the trial supplies, and consumer goods. Real
credit quality of states because of im­ exports of agricultural products fell
provements in state revenue flows and sharply, hurt by foreign bans on U.S.
restraint on spending. beef products following reports of mad
cow disease in a U.S. herd. Exports of
services rose moderately.
The External Sector Prices of total exports rose at an
In the first quarter of 2004, the U.S.
annual rate of 53⁄
4
percent in the first
quarter, boosted by another jump in agri­
current account deficit expanded to an
cultural prices along with substantial
annual rate of $580 billion, or about
increases in the prices of other primary
5 percent of GDP. As in the past, the
commodities and industrial supplies.
widening was driven primarily by a
Prices of U.S. agricultural exports have
larger deficit in trade of goods and
been pushed up by very strong global
services. The surplus on net investment
demand, particularly from China. For
income declined in the first quarter but
specific products, such as cotton and
remained well above its average value
soybeans, lower production in some
in the previous year. The deficit on net
countries also contributed to price run-
unilateral transfers rose because of a
ups. More recently, prices of soybeans
concentration of disbursements of gov­
and other agricultural products have
ernment grants in the first quarter.
eased in the face of a slowing in the
growth of demand from China and the
International Trade
anticipation of larger harvests. Even so,
The U.S. trade deficit in goods and available data point to continued strong
services registered $548 billion at an increases in export prices in the second
annual rate in the first quarter, about quarter.
$46 billion larger than in the fourth Supported by solid U.S. economic
quarter of 2003. On average, data for growth, real imports of goods and ser­
April and May suggest that the trade vices rose at an annual rate of 101⁄
2
per­
deficit continued to widen in the second cent in the first quarter. This increase
quarter. was below the fourth-quarter pace but
Real exports of goods and services still roughly double the rate of increase
increased at an annual rate of 71⁄
2
per­ for 2003 as a whole. Real imports of
cent in the first quarter of 2004, well off goods were boosted by a sharp increase

42 91st Annual Report, 2004
in oil imports. Gains in imports of non- flows into U.S. bonds. Foreign official
oil goods were also sizable and wide­ inflows, already sizable in 2003, rose
spread across categories. Imports of ser­ sharply in the first quarter of 2004
vices grew slightly in the first quarter. and then moderated somewhat. Simi­
The spot price of West Texas interme­ larly, private foreign purchases of U.S.
diate (WTI) crude oil surged above $40 bonds, which were significant in 2003,
per barrel in May and has since fluctu­ increased sharply in the first quarter and
ated close to that level. The run-up in also appear to have moderated in the
the price since the beginning of the year second quarter. In contrast, foreign
has been driven by surprisingly strong demand for U.S. equities was weak in
global demand for oil. Supply issues 2003 and has remained so in 2004. Pur­
have been important as well. These were chases of foreign equities by private U.S.
mainly continued violence in Iraq, investors appear to be strengthening, but
including the sabotage of oil facilities, U.S. investors still show no appetite for
attacks on foreigners in Saudi Arabia, foreign bonds.
ongoing unrest in Nigeria, political tur­ Direct investment into the United
moil in Venezuela, and tax payment States in the first quarter continued to be
difficulties at a major Russian oil com­ restrained by the slowdown of global
pany. The recent increase in OPEC pro­ mergers and acquisitions since 2002. In
duction (mainly by Saudi Arabia) has contrast, U.S. direct investment abroad
eased the upward pressure on prices a was strong in 2003 and in the first quar­
bit, but they have remained elevated. ter of 2004, as the effect of fewer merg­
Prices of imported non-oil goods rose ers and acquisitions was offset by siz­
at an annual rate of 51⁄
2
percent in able reinvested earnings.
the first quarter after minimal increases
in the second half of 2003. Prices for
The Labor Market
imported consumer goods rose at an
annual rate of 23⁄
4
percent after being
Employment and Unemployment
flat in 2003. Skyrocketing global com­
modity prices last year and early this The demand for labor turned up in late
year boosted prices of imported indus­ 2003 after an extended period of weak­
trial supplies (especially metals) and of ness, and it has gathered additional
foods, feed, and beverages. The jump steam this year. After averaging about
in commodity prices reflected strong 60,000 per month in the fourth quarter
demand, the net depreciation of the of 2003, gains in private nonfarm pay­
dollar over the past two years, and the roll employment rose to an average of
limited expansion in supply of many about 200,000 per month in the first half
commodities since the 2001 trough in of 2004. The job gains were especially
commodity prices. Available data sug­ large in March, April, and May but
gest a modest stepdown in the rate of ebbed somewhat in June. The civilian
increase of import prices in the second unemployment rate, which had fallen
quarter; the move in part reflects a flat­ from a recent peak of 6.3 percent in
tening of consumer goods prices. June 2003 to 5.7 percent in December
2003, was little changed over the first
half of the year. In June, it stood at
The Financial Account
5.6 percent.
The U.S. current account deficit has con­ The increases in payrolls over the first
tinued to be financed largely by foreign half of 2004 were widespread. Espe­

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 43
cially notable was the turnaround in the cent per year in the second half of
manufacturing sector, in which employ­ the 1990s. During that earlier period, an
ment bottomed out in January and expansion of the capital stock was an
then rose a cumulative 65,000 jobs important source of productivity growth.
through June. The rise in manufacturing However, in the more recent period,
jobs was concentrated in the durable when the business environment—at
goods industries—in particular, those least until the past few quarters—was
making fabricated metals and other characterized by sluggish demand, lean
construction-related products, comput­ capital budgets, and an extraordinary
ers and electronic equipment, and reluctance of firms to add to payrolls,
machinery. After a long string of businesses appear to have raised their
declines, employment at producers of productivity mainly through changes in
nondurable goods was little changed, organizational structures and better use
on net, over the first half. Job gains in of the capital already in place. With
virtually all other major sectors have hiring having picked up of late, mea­
been greater this year than last. In par­ sured productivity growth may slow in
ticular, hiring in retail trade, which coming quarters; but if recent experi­
had been lackluster in 2003, turned up ence is any guide, businesses will con­
appreciably, and construction employ­ tinue to focus on achieving structural
ment increased further. The professional improvements in the efficiency of their
and business services sector also posted operations. The upswing in investment
a sizable rise, in part because the spending now under way also bodes
rebound in manufacturing activity lifted well for sustained favorable productiv­
hiring at temporary-help firms. A clear ity performance in the period ahead.
indication of the breadth of the employ­ The rapid productivity growth in
ment increases is provided by the six- recent years has helped to bolster
month diffusion index compiled by the increases in hourly compensation in the
Bureau of Labor Statistics (BLS). The face of the soft labor market and the low
index is equal to the percentage of consumer price inflation in 2003. As a
industries that increased employment result, increases in the employment cost
over the most recent six months plus index (ECI) measure of hourly compen­
one-half the percentage with unchanged sation, which is based on a survey of
employment; in June, the index moved private nonfarm businesses conducted
up to its highest level since April 2000. quarterly by the BLS, have held fairly
steady of late. In fact, the rise in the ECI
over the twelve months ending in
Productivity and Labor Costs
March—at a shade less than 4 percent—
Gains in labor productivity have slowed was virtually the same as the increases
somewhat in recent quarters after the over the preceding two years. Benefit
spectacular increases of mid-2003. Still, costs, which rose 7 percent over the year
according to the currently published ending in March, have continued to
data, output per hour in the nonfarm be the fastest rising portion of hourly
business sector rose a remarkable compensation; health insurance costs
51⁄
2
percent over the year ending in the have remained on a steep uptrend, and
first quarter. Over the past three years, employers have boosted their contribu­
increases in productivity have averaged tions to defined-benefit retirement plans
more than 4 percent per year, compared to make up for earlier stock market
with average increases of about 21⁄
2
per­ losses. The rising benefit costs have

44 91st Annual Report, 2004
likely exerted some downward pressure through June and show some modera­
on wages, which rose just 21⁄
2
percent tion in the core component of the series.
over the twelve months ending in Over the first half of the year, the core
March; the twelve-month change in the CPI rose at an annual rate of 21⁄
2
per­
wage component of the ECI, which was cent, compared with an increase of
close to 4 percent in 2000 and 2001, has 11⁄
4
percent over the four quarters of
been in the range of 21⁄
2
percent to 3 per­ 2003.
cent since late 2002. Reflecting the surge in crude oil
The change in compensation per prices, PCE energy prices rose at an
hour in the nonfarm business (NFB) annual rate of more than 25 percent in
sector—an alternative measure of hourly the first quarter; they apparently posted
compensation based on data constructed another outsized increase in the second
for the NIPA—has swung widely in quarter. Gasoline prices increased rap­
recent years. Fluctuations in the value idly through May as crude oil costs rose
of stock option exercises, which are and as price markups were boosted by
excluded from the ECI but included in strong demand and lean inventories;
the NFB measure, likely account for although gasoline prices have fallen on
some of the differential movements in balance since late May, they are cur­
the two series. The four-quarter change rently nearly 30 percent above their
in the NFB measure bottomed out at a level at the end of last year. As for
bit less than 2 percent in 2002, when the natural gas, which can often substitute
value of exercised options was drop­ for fuel oil in the industrial sector, spot
ping; it has moved up steadily since that prices were elevated at the start of the
time and, in the first quarter, stood at year, fell somewhat in February and
41⁄
2
percent—a rate not much different March, and trended up over the spring.
from the increase in the ECI. With The higher spot prices for natural gas
productivity growth slowing to a pace this spring pushed up prices paid by
below that of NFB hourly compensa­ consumers through June. PCE electric­
tion, unit labor costs rose in both the ity prices appear to have risen at an
fourth and first quarters after having annual rate of 3 percent over the first
trended down over the preceding two half of the year, a pace similar to that in
years. 2003.
Although volatile from month to
month, consumer food prices rose mod­
Prices
erately on balance over the first half
Inflation moved higher in the first half of 2004 after having moved up in late
of 2004. After rising just 11⁄
2
percent 2003. Robust global demand is impart­
over the four quarters of 2003, the price ing upward impetus to food prices,
index for personal consumption expen­ but U.S. producers are in the process
ditures (PCE) increased at an annual of boosting supply, which should help
rate of 31⁄
2
percent between the fourth restrain increases in retail food prices in
quarter of 2003 and May 2004. In coming quarters.
that period, energy prices soared, and The step-up in core PCE inflation this
increases in core consumer prices picked year has been especially pronounced
up to an annual rate of 21⁄
4
percent— in a few categories. In particular, prices
more than 1 percentage point faster than of motor vehicles have firmed after a
the increase in 2003. Data for the con­ noticeable decrease in 2003. In addition,
sumer price index (CPI) are available increases in shelter costs, which were

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 45
surprisingly low in 2003, are now run­ tant, cyclical swings in commodity
ning more in line with earlier trends. prices tend to have only a minor effect
Core inflation has also been lifted this on overall inflation, both because they
year by substantial increases, on bal­ account for a small share of total costs
ance, in a number of categories for and because changes in commodity
which prices cannot be derived from prices tend to be partly absorbed in
market transactions and thus must be firms’ profit margins, at least for a time.
imputed by the Bureau of Economic The faster rate of inflation this year
Analysis—for example, prices of finan­ underscores the difficulty of gauging
cial services provided by banks without price pressures. Nevertheless, on the
explicit charge. These non-market-based whole, the evidence suggests that slack
prices, which were about flat in 2003, remains in labor and product mar­
are difficult to estimate, and the imputed kets, which should be exerting some
figures tend to be volatile. downward pressure on inflation. The
A number of factors have contributed unemployment rate—at 51⁄
2
percent
to the run-up in core inflation this year. currently—is not significantly lower
Higher oil prices have doubtless raised than it was through much of 2002 and
the cost of producing other goods and 2003, when core inflation was trending
services. So have the steep increases in down. And despite the run-up this year,
prices of non-oil commodities such as capacity utilization in the manufacturing
copper and lumber, which came about as sector is still below its longer-run aver­
economic activity strengthened world­ age. In addition, the strong upward trend
wide and as industrial capacity utiliza­ in productivity is continuing to help
tion both here and abroad tightened. keep the rise in labor costs muted, and
Likewise, the decline in the dollar has profit margins are sufficiently wide to
boosted non-oil import prices and thus give firms scope to absorb cost increases
the costs of inputs for many domestic for a while without putting undue
producers. The weaker dollar has also upward pressure on prices.
likely lessened the pressure on firms The upturn in actual inflation has
facing foreign competition to hold the been echoed in some measures of infla­
line on prices—a consideration that is tion expectations. For example, accord­
probably contributing to the widespread ing to the Michigan Survey Research
perception that firms’ pricing power has Center, the median expectation for infla­
increased lately. Moreover, unit labor tion over the coming year has averaged
costs have edged up recently after hav­ slightly more than 3 percent since early
ing declined noticeably in 2002 and spring after hovering in the area of
2003. 21⁄
4
percent to 23⁄
4
percent in 2003 and
From a cyclical perspective, the sharp early 2004. The median expectation for
upturn in commodity prices is not sur­ inflation over the next five to ten years
prising, given the pickup in the growth has been running a bit below 3 percent
of industrial production. In fact, such in recent months, a reading similar to the
large increases in commodity prices figures for 2002 and 2003. According to
are typical as economic activity accel­ the Survey of Professional Forecasters
erates and capacity utilization rises— conducted by the Federal Reserve Bank
especially for products for which the of Philadelphia, expectations of infla­
supply is relatively fixed in the short tion over the next ten years held steady
run. Some portion of these increases in June at 21⁄
2
percent. Inflation compen­
usually proves transitory. More impor­ sation over the next five years as mea­

46 91st Annual Report, 2004
Alternative Measures of Price Change dropped from 21⁄
4
percent to 13⁄
4
percent
Percent over the same period; the deceleration
reflects mainly the effects of energy
2002 2003 prices, which rose even more rapidly
Price measure to to
2003 2004 over the year ending in the first quarter
of 2003 than they did over the most
Chain-type (Q1 to Q1) recent year.
Gross domestic product ........ 1.7 1.8
Gross domestic purchases ...... 2.3 1.7
Personal consumption
expenditures .............. 2.4 1.6
Excluding food and energy . . . 1.6 1.3 U.S. Financial Markets
Fixed-weight (Q2 to Q2) As 2004 opened, financial market condi­
Consumer price index .......... 2.2 2.8
Excluding food and energy . . . 1.5 1.8 tions were quite accommodative, with
low corporate bond yields, narrow risk
Note. Changes are based on quarterly averages of
spreads, and relatively easy terms and
seasonally adjusted data.
standards on bank lending. Although
equity prices changed little, and interest
rates rose on balance in response to
sured by the spread between the yield
positive economic news and expecta­
on nominal Treasury securities and their
tions of a tightening of monetary policy,
indexed counterparts rose noticeably
financial conditions in the first half
during the first half of 2004. To be sure,
of the year remained supportive of
inflation compensation is also influ­
economic growth. Business borrowing
enced by perceptions of inflation risk
nevertheless remained tentative, while
and the secular increase in demand for
increases in the debt of the federal
inflation-indexed debt, but the rise in
government and of households were
near-term inflation compensation likely
sizable.
reflects, at least in part, higher inflation
expectations. Similar to the survey-
Interest Rates
based measures of longer-run inflation
expectations, inflation compensation for From the end of 2003 through the end of
the period five years to ten years ahead March, yields on nominal Treasury cou­
was little changed on net over the first pon securities fell, on net, about 30 to
half of the year. 45 basis points. Although interest rates
Broader NIPA price measures are rose immediately after the FOMC’s
available only through the first quarter, January meeting in response to the
and the four-quarter changes in these Committee’s decision to remove its
series do not show the rise in inflation statement that monetary policy could
indicated by the monthly data discussed remain accommodative for ‘‘a consider­
above. In particular, the rate of increase able period,’’ the increase proved to be
in the price index for GDP over the year short lived. Weak employment reports
ending in the first quarter was just released in early February and early
13⁄
4
percent, the same as over the pre­ March prompted yields to fall amid
ceding year. The four-quarter change doubts about the strength of the eco­
in the price index for gross domestic nomic expansion. Federal funds futures
purchases—which is defined as the contracts at the end of March appeared
prices paid for purchases of domestic to indicate that market participants
and imported consumption, investment, placed small odds on a tightening of
and government goods and services— monetary policy before late 2004, and

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 47
contracts also seemed to price in only a as the economic expansion was seen as
gradual increase in the federal funds rate gathering steam.
during 2005.
Interest rates backed up in the second
Equity Markets
quarter as data releases increasingly
suggested that the economic expansion Over the first half of 2004, equity prices
would remain vigorous. Yields on the were subject to the strong crosscurrents
two-year and ten-year nominal Treasury of robust earnings reports, rising interest
notes ended the first half of the year rates, fluctuating fears about geopoliti­
90 and 36 basis points higher, respec­ cal developments, and sharply higher oil
tively, than at the end of 2003, as mar­ prices. On balance, broad equity price
kets adjusted to the greater likelihood of indexes at the end of June had edged
an earlier onset and more rapid pace of about 21⁄
2
percent to 31⁄
4
percent above
monetary policy tightening. The surpris­ year-end levels after having surged
ingly strong employment reports pub­ 25–30 percent over the course of 2003.
lished in April and May, higher-than­ Over the first half, analysts raised their
expected readings on core inflation, and estimates of profits for coming quarters;
surging oil prices all spurred increases the upward revision outstripped the
in Treasury yields. After the release of more modest increase in equity prices
the employment report in May, federal and boosted the ratio of expected year-
funds futures contracts priced in a hike ahead earnings to stock prices. With real
in the target federal funds rate at the interest rates higher, however, the differ­
June FOMC meeting and a more rapid ence between the earnings–price ratio
tightening of monetary policy than had and the real ten-year Treasury yield—
been anticipated. With the evolving out­ a crude measure of the equity risk
look for monetary policy, the volatility premium—changed little to remain
of short-term interest rates implied by close to its average value over the past
option prices jumped in the first half of two decades and above its level during
the year after staying in a relatively low the late 1990s.
range in 2003. Near-term interest rates
declined a bit after the Committee’s
Debt and Financial Intermediation
decision at its June meeting to raise the
intended federal funds rate 25 basis Aggregate debt of the domestic nonfi­
points; the Committee’s reaffirmation nancial sectors expanded at an annual
that policy accommodation likely could rate of about 81⁄
2
percent in the first
be removed at a ‘‘measured’’ pace quarter of 2004, a gain similar to last
apparently reassured investors that a year’s increase. Debt growth in the busi­
steep rise in the federal funds rate prob­ ness sector has remained subdued so far
ably was not in train. this year, as ample internal funding has
Yields on investment-grade corporate limited the need for external finance. In
debt moved roughly in line with those contrast, household debt has continued
on comparable nominal Treasury securi­ to expand rapidly, spurred by an ele­
ties over the first half of the year, pro­ vated pace of home purchases and cash-
ducing little net change in risk spreads outs from mortgage refinancing. The
from their level at the end of last year. large federal budget deficit led to
Spreads on speculative-grade debt over another sharp increase in Treasury debt
Treasury debt declined a bit further after in the first half of this year. Municipal
having narrowed sharply during 2003 borrowing moderated somewhat, on bal­

48 91st Annual Report, 2004
ance, in the first half of the year, as the weakness in money market mutual funds
improving fiscal condition of state and and small time deposits. Given the
local governments reduced the need for recent very low yields on these two
short-term borrowing to cover budget components of M2, households likely
gaps. viewed them as less attractive savings
The growth of credit on the books of vehicles than other assets.
depository institutions picked up to an
annual rate of 14 percent in the first
International Developments
quarter of 2004. Financing secured by
residential real estate—including home Foreign economic activity expanded in
mortgages, home equity loans, and the first half of this year at a pace only
mortgage-backed securities—drove the slightly below the rapid increase in the
expansion. In contrast, business loans second half of 2003. Global trade has
continued to run off, falling at an annual been boosted by strong demand, espe­
rate of about 5 percent in the first half cially from the United States and China.
of the year after a 10 percent drop in The run-up in oil and commodity prices
2003. The deceleration was consistent has contributed to rising, though still
with some signs that demand for busi­ moderate, inflation across the industrial
ness loans was beginning to recover as and developing countries.
well as with an easing of standards and By the end of the first half of this
terms on these loans. year, monetary policy in most major for­
eign economies had either tightened or
assumed a less accommodative tone.
The M2 Monetary Aggregates
Citing high rates of capacity utilization
In the first half of 2004, short-term inter­ and mounting inflationary pressures, the
est rates were stable and M2 grew at an Bank of England has raised its target
annual rate of 61⁄
2
percent—a pace that rate 100 basis points since early Novem­
was roughly in line with estimates of ber. Mexico and China also have tight­
nominal GDP—after contracting at a ened policy. Elsewhere, including the
record rate in the fourth quarter of 2003. euro area, Canada, and Japan, central
Liquid deposits—the largest component banks most recently have kept policy
of M2—had been depressed late last unchanged after easing previously. In
year by the ebbing of last summer’s general, official statements are express­
mortgage refinancing boom. Mortgage ing increasing concern over the infla­
refinancings tend to boost M2 as the tionary risks associated with stronger
proceeds are temporarily placed in non- economic activity and higher world
interest-bearing deposit accounts pend­ energy and commodity prices.
ing disbursement of funds to the hold­ In foreign financial markets, equity
ers of mortgage-backed securities. When price performance has been more mixed
refinancings slowed last year, the so far in 2004 than during the second
decline in such escrow accounts held half of 2003; sharply rising interest rates
down the growth of liquid deposits. In over the past few months have weighed
the first half of this year, M2 probably on equity valuations, damping the
received a boost from the new round of effects of an improved earnings outlook.
mortgage refinancings that followed the Since year-end, stock prices in Europe
first-quarter decline in mortgage interest and Canada have changed little, on bal­
rates. The strength in liquid deposits ance. In contrast, rapidly improving eco­
was partly offset, however, by continued nomic conditions in Japan have helped

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 49
boost Japanese equity prices about In financial markets, the stronger econ­
10 percent. Other Asian stock price omy boosted equity markets and helped
indexes have fallen, on average, in part drive up the yield on the ten-year bell­
because of concerns about the possibil­ wether government bond to more than
ity of an acute slowdown in China. 13⁄
4
percent from its June 2003 record
Mexican stocks have been bolstered by low of about 1⁄
2
percent. After making
strong earnings growth of leading Mexi­ substantial sales of yen for dollars in the
can communications firms and, more first quarter, Japanese authorities ceased
generally, by the strengthening U.S. intervention in mid-March. Even so, the
expansion. Foreign long-term interest yen depreciated early in the second
rates rose rapidly in the second quarter quarter before appreciating to around
as new data (including from the United ¥109 per dollar.
States) showing faster growth and Economic conditions in the euro area
higher inflation led market participants firmed over the first half of 2004, but
to expect more-aggressive monetary performance varied across countries,
tightening. Over the first half of the and the region as a whole continues to
year, the spread on internationally issued lag the global upturn. Real GDP in the
sovereign debt of emerging-market euro area increased at an annual rate of
economies over U.S. Treasuries moved 21⁄
4
percent in the first quarter; output
up somewhat from its very low level. in France, Spain, and several smaller
After depreciating over the previous member countries rose relatively briskly,
two years, the value of the dollar rose while growth in Germany and Italy
slightly, on balance, in the first half of was less robust. In the first quarter,
2004. The firming of the dollar has been domestic demand firmed noticeably,
attributed to perceptions by market par­ except in Germany, where growth was
ticipants that near-term monetary tight­ due entirely to a spike in exports. Ger­
ening in the United States would be man consumer spending remains ane­
faster than such tightening abroad. mic, held down by a weak labor market
and low consumer confidence. Euro-
area indicators for the second quarter
Industrial Economies
initially were upbeat, but more-recent
A broadly based recovery appears to data have been mixed. Labor markets
have been established in Japan over the have yet to benefit from the recovery,
first half of 2004. Real GDP rose at an and the average unemployment rate in
annual rate of more than 6 percent in the region edged up to 9 percent in the
the first quarter after an even greater spring. Inflation for the euro area over
increase in the fourth quarter. Aided by the twelve months ending in June was
demand from China, growth of Japanese near 21⁄
2
percent, a rate above the Euro­
real exports remained robust. Personal pean Central Bank’s medium-term goal
consumption and business investment of less than, but close to, 2 percent.
also firmed. More-recent indicators Excluding energy, food, alcohol, and
show that domestic strength continued tobacco, prices rose slightly less than
in the spring with large gains in house­ 2 percent over the same period.
hold expenditures and improved labor Economic expansion in the United
market conditions. Deflation continued Kingdom continued unabated over the
to wane in Japan. Consumer price defla­ first half of 2004. Labor markets tight­
tion over the first half of the year was ened further; the unemployment rate
slight, and wholesale prices increased. edged down to its lowest level in almost

50 91st Annual Report, 2004
three decades, and labor earnings posted sures included increases in reserve
solid gains. Despite the strong econ­ requirements and in some interest
omy, consumer price inflation over the rates as well as stricter criteria for the
twelve months ending in June was approval of investment projects. A sharp
11⁄
2
percent, remaining below the central slowdown in estimated real GDP for the
bank’s official target rate of 2 percent. second quarter suggests that these steps
Conditions in the U.K. housing market, are working. Despite the recent slowing
however, remained red hot, with double- in growth, Chinese exports and imports
digit price increases, high levels of soared in the first half of the year, and
household mortgage and consumer trade was close to balanced.
borrowing, and sizable withdrawals of Growth in the other Asian emerging-
home equity. market economies slowed only moder­
The Canadian economy picked up ately in the first quarter from the fast
steam in the first half of 2004 after a pace at the end of last year. Exports,
year plagued with difficulties including which continued to be the driving force
SARS, mad cow disease, and a regional behind that growth, were fueled by
power outage. Sizable gains in con­ Chinese demand as well as by the
sumption and investment boosted output recovery in the global high-tech market
in the first quarter, and indicators are and stronger world demand overall.
pointing to continued good performance Consumer demand generally rose across
in these sectors. Export growth was the region with the notable excep­
strong, as the robust economic perfor­ tion of Korea, where high levels of con­
mance of the United States appears to sumer debt are weighing on spend­
have outweighed the negative effect of ing. Although still only moderate,
Canadian dollar appreciation on trade. inflation across the Asian emerging-
The unemployment rate was relatively market economies is beginning to rise
stable over the first half, and employ­ as stronger aggregate demand takes
ment bounced back in the second quar­ hold and higher energy and commod­
ter from a first-quarter lull. Consumer ity prices pass through to prices more
price inflation decreased early in the generally.
year, but energy costs helped drive up The Mexican economy has been pro­
the rate to 21⁄
2
percent over the twelve pelled this year by strong demand from
months ending in June. Prices excluding the United States. Gains have been
food, energy, and indirect taxes have broadly based, with sharp increases in
remained more subdued, rising slightly industrial production, exports, construc­
less than 11⁄
2
percent over the same tion, and retail sales. Employment in
period. the industries most closely linked to
U.S. trade also has started to increase.
Responding to a rise in twelve-month
Emerging-Market Economies
inflation to slightly above its 2 percent
Estimates suggest that real GDP in to 4 percent target range, the Bank of
China surged in the first quarter with Mexico has tightened policy several
continued outsized gains in fixed-asset times so far this year. Elevated oil prices
investment. Fears of overinvestment, boosted the Mexican public-sector fiscal
particularly in the steel, cement, and alu­ surplus to a record high during the first
minum industries, led Chinese officials five months of the year and facilitated
to intensify their tightening measures an increase in federal transfers to state
early in the second quarter. These mea­ governments.

Monetary Policy Report of July 2004 51
In Brazil, GDP grew robustly in the The recovery in Argentina has contin­
first quarter, and indications are that ued at a rapid pace in recent quarters,
economic activity continued to expand but limited investment in the energy
in the second quarter with support from sector, reflecting a lack of structural
strong external demand. Job growth has reforms, has forced the government to
been robust, although unemployment import electricity, natural gas, and fuel
has remained high. Inflation, however, oil from neighboring countries. Credi­
continues to concern authorities. Asset tors have shown little enthusiasm for
prices weakened earlier this year, in part the country’s latest debt restructuring
because of rising global interest rates plan, and the federal government faces
but also because of market participants’ difficult challenges in normalizing its
unease about the direction of structural international financial situation and
and fiscal reforms; since then, asset reforming its fiscal relations with the
prices have partially rebounded. provinces.

Federal Reserve Operations

55
Consumer and Community Affairs
Among the Federal Reserve’s responsi­ consumer financial products and ser­
bilities in the areas of consumer and vices at the request of Congress.
community affairs are During 2004, the Board issued final
rules implementing provisions of the
• writing and interpreting regulations to Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions
implement federal laws that protect Act, an act that significantly amends
and inform consumers, the Fair Credit Reporting Act. The
Board also issued guidance on the stan­
• supervising state member banks to dards it and the Federal Deposit Insur­
ensure their compliance with the ance Corporation (FDIC) will use when
regulations, determining whether to take supervisory
or enforcement actions in cases involv­
• investigating complaints from the ing the unfair and deceptive trade prac­
public about state member bank com­ tices provisions of the Federal Trade
pliance with regulations, and Commission Act. The Board produced
two reports for Congress summarizing
• promoting community development in the findings of Board studies on the
historically underserved markets. disclosure of fees related to debit card
purchases and on the ability of consum­
These responsibilities are carried out by ers to avoid receiving unsolicited writ­
the members of the Board of Governors, ten offers of credit or insurance. In addi­
the Board’s Division of Consumer and tion, the Board revised its Truth in
Community Affairs, and the consumer Lending Act regulation and the associ­
and community affairs staff of the Fed­ ated commentary, issued interim final
eral Reserve Banks. rules incorporating technical changes
to the regulation implementing the
Community Reinvestment Act, raised
Implementation of Statutes
certain thresholds that would trigger
Designed to Inform and Protect
additional requirements under the Home
Consumers
Ownership and Equity Protection Act,
The Board of Governors writes regula­ and issued a final rule revising the dis­
tions to implement federal laws involv­ closure tables that the federal finan­
ing consumer financial services and fair cial regulatory agencies use to publicly
lending. The Board revises and updates release Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
these regulations to address the intro­ data reported by covered institutions.
duction of new products, to implement
legislative changes to existing laws, and
Fair and Accurate Credit
to address problems consumers may
Transactions Act
encounter in their financial transactions.
To interpret and clarify the regulations, In December 2003, the President signed
Board staff issues commentaries and the Fair and Accurate Credit Trans­
other guidance. In addition, the staff actions Act (the FACT Act) into law.
may undertake studies on aspects of The FACT Act amends the Fair Credit

56 91st Annual Report, 2004
Reporting Act (FCRA) in numerous established December 31, 2003, as the
respects, including making permanent effective date for the preemption pro­
an FCRA provision that preempts states visions of the FACT Act, as well as for
from enacting laws in seven areas provisions authorizing the agencies to
addressed by the FCRA. The FACT Act adopt rules or take other actions to
also includes provisions to address iden­ implement the FACT Act. The final joint
tity theft, the accuracy of consumer rules the agencies adopted in February
reports, the duties of furnishers of infor­ 2004 included the same schedule of
mation, the ability of consumers to opt effective dates contained in the interim
out of receiving marketing solicitations rules. The Board’s final rule amended
from an organization when the solicita­ its Regulation V, which implements the
tion is based on information provided FCRA.
to that organization by its affiliate, and Also in December 2003, the Board
the ability of creditors to obtain or and the FTC had issued for comment
use medical information in connection proposed joint rules that would establish
with determining credit eligibility. (The a schedule of effective dates for other
FACT Act also established the Finan­ provisions of the FACT Act that did not
cial Literacy and Education Commis­ contain effective dates. After reviewing
sion. See ‘‘Promotion of Community the comments on the proposal, the agen­
Economic Development in Historically cies, in the February 2004 joint final
Underserved Markets’’ later in this rules, established March 31, 2004, as
chapter.) the effective date for provisions of the
The FACT Act requires the Board to FACT Act that did not require signifi­
issue regulations or guidelines to imple­ cant changes to business procedures. For
ment various provisions of the statute. those FACT Act provisions that would
In 2004, the Board issued three final likely entail significant changes to busi­
rules: one pertaining to effective dates ness procedures, the agencies estab­
for certain provisions of the FACT Act, lished December 1, 2004, as the effec­
one pertaining to the furnishing of nega­ tive date, to allow a reasonable time
tive information to consumer reporting for the industry to establish systems that
agencies, and one pertaining to the comply with the statute.
disposal of consumer information. The
Board is currently working on several
Furnishing of Negative Information
additional regulations or guidelines
required by the FACT Act. In June, the Board issued a final rule
amending Regulation V to add model
notices that financial institutions may
Effective Dates
use to comply with the notice require­
In February, the Board and the Federal ment for furnishing negative informa­
Trade Commission (FTC) issued joint tion to nationwide consumer report­
final rules to implement section 3 of the ing agencies. Under section 217 of the
FACT Act, which required these agen­ FACT Act, a financial institution that
cies to establish effective dates for pro­ furnishes negative information about
visions of the act that did not already credit extended to a customer (such as
contain specific effective dates. The information on a customer’s delinquen­
Board and the FTC had jointly adopted cies or late payments) to a nationwide
interim rules in December 2003 that consumer reporting agency is required

Consumer and Community Affairs 57
to provide a clear and conspicuous writ­ measures for properly disposing of con­
ten notice to the customer about furnish­ sumer information derived from con­
ing negative information. The required sumer reports (such as credit reports).
notice is a one-time notice, and a finan­ The agencies’ final rules implement sec­
cial institution may provide the notice tion 216 of the FACT Act by amending
before, or no later than thirty days after, the Interagency Guidelines Establish­
furnishing the negative information to a ing Standards for Safeguarding Cus­
nationwide consumer reporting agency. tomer Information (retitled the Inter­
Section 217 of the FACT Act became agency Guidelines Establishing Stan­
effective on December 1, 2004. dards for Information Security), which
The FACT Act required the Board were adopted in 2001 (as appendix D-2
to issue a concise model form not to of Regulation H). The National Credit
exceed thirty words that institutions Union Administration, the FTC, and
may, but are not required to, use to the Securities and Exchange Commis­
comply with the notice requirement. The sion adopted similar standards for their
Board’s final rule added two model institutions.
notices to Regulation V. One notice may The interagency guidelines currently
be used by financial institutions that require financial institutions to protect
give the notice before furnishing nega­ customer information by implementing
tive information to a nationwide con­ information security programs. An insti­
sumer reporting agency. The other may tution’s information security program
be used by financial institutions that must include measures for the proper
give the notice after furnishing negative disposal of ‘‘customer information.’’
information to a nationwide consumer Such information is generally defined as
reporting agency. The Board also nonpublic personal information about a
amended Regulation V to incorporate a ‘‘customer,’’ namely, an individual who
statutory safe harbor relating to the use obtains a financial product or service to
of the model notices. The safe harbor in be used primarily for personal, family,
the FACT Act provides that a financial or household purposes, and who has
institution will be considered to be in a continuing relationship with the finan­
compliance with the notice requirement cial institution. The final rules amend
if the institution uses the model notice the interagency guidelines to require in­
issued by the Board, or if it uses the model stitutions to also include measures for
notice and rearranges the format. The the proper disposal of ‘‘consumer infor­
Board also provided additional guidance mation,’’ which is generally defined as
about using the model notices, including information that is a consumer report
guidance on how financial institutions (such as a credit report), or that is
may rearrange the format of the notices derived from a consumer report about
without losing the safe harbor from lia­ an individual (regardless of whether that
bility that the model notices provide. individual is a customer), and that is
maintained or otherwise possessed by,
or on behalf of, the institution for a
Disposal of Consumer Information
business purpose. The final rules will
In December, the Board along with the take effect on July 1, 2005; however,
other federal financial regulatory agen­ financial institutions do not need to
cies issued interagency final rules to modify existing contracts with their ser­
require financial institutions to adopt vice providers until July 1, 2006.

58 91st Annual Report, 2004
Interagency Guidance on Unfair unaware of the existence or the source
and Deceptive Practices of PIN fees. The primary conclusions of
the study address four principal areas:
In March, the Board and the FDIC
(1) the prevalence of PIN fees; (2) the
jointly issued a statement outlining the
degree of compliance by depository
standards the agencies will use to deter­
institutions with current disclosure
mine when state-chartered banks are
requirements under the Electronic Fund
engaging in unfair or deceptive trade
Transfer Act (EFTA), as implemented
practices. Such practices are illegal
by the Board’s Regulation E; (3) the
under section 5 of the Federal Trade
adequacy of existing disclosures and the
Commission Act. The Board and the
likely benefits and costs of new require­
FDIC will apply these standards when
ments for disclosure statements; and
weighing the need to take supervisory or
(4) the feasibility of real-time disclosure
enforcement actions and when seeking
(namely, disclosing PIN fees at the
to ensure that unfair or deceptive prac­
time of a transaction on a POS terminal
tices do not recur. The statement also
display).
provides best practices and general guid­
ance to state-chartered banks to help
them manage risks relating to unfair or
Prevalence of PIN Fees
deceptive acts or practices, as well as to
help them avoid engaging in such acts The Board estimated that in 2004 about
or practices. The best practices address 15 percent of all customers with debit
some of the business areas that have cards had accounts that were subject to
the greatest potential for unfair or PIN fees. Because customers can
deceptive acts and practices: advertis­ modify their behavior to avoid PIN fees
ing and solicitation, servicing and col­ (for example, by using a signature
lections, and managing and monitor­ instead of a PIN to secure a transac­
ing employees and third-party service tion), the fraction of customers with
providers. debit cards who actually pay these
fees is likely between 10 percent and
15 percent.
Board Study of the Disclosure of
Point-of-Sale Debit Fees under the
Electronic Fund Transfer Act Degree of Compliance by
Depository Institutions
In November, the Board issued a report
summarizing the results of its study of The EFTA and the Board’s Regulation E
the disclosure of fees related to debit require depository institutions to dis­
card purchases. The study focused spe­ close certain fees to consumers on the
cifically on the debit fees that a financial initial disclosure of account terms, on
institution may impose when a customer change-in-terms notices, and on peri­
engages in a point-of-sale (POS) debit odic statements of account activity. The
transaction and provides a personal Board found that more than 95 percent
identification number (PIN). These fees of depository institutions satisfy all the
are referred to as ‘‘PIN fees.’’ Some current regulatory requirements for any
members of the U.S. Senate Committee electronic funds transfer, and that an
on Banking, Housing, and Urban Affairs even higher percentage satisfy the spe­
requested the study because they were cific requirements for the disclosure of
concerned that consumers may be PIN fees at the point of sale.

Consumer and Community Affairs 59
Adequacy of Existing Disclosures gress directed the Board to study the
ability of consumers to avoid (or opt out
Consumer and other data suggest that
of) receiving written offers of credit or
the PIN fee information in initial disclo­
insurance in connection with transac­
sures and in change-in-terms notices
tions the consumer did not initiate. The
is of limited value to consumers. Some
Board also studied the potential effect
consumers first learn of debit fees from
on consumers of any further restrictions
their periodic statements, and many
on providing them with such written
institutions’ periodic statements do not
offers of credit or insurance. In partic­
identify the recipient of a debit fee.
ular, Congress directed the Board to
These findings suggest that improving
address the following five issues: (1) the
periodic statements, and potentially
availability to consumers of opt-out
initial disclosures and change-in-terms
mechanisms, that is, methods for con­
notices, could be a relatively low-cost
sumers to opt out of having their names
way to provide consumers with better
and other information used for pre-
information about the PIN fees their
screened solicitations; (2) the extent to
depository institutions impose.
which consumers use existing opt-out
mechanisms; (3) the benefits to consum­
Feasibility of Real-Time Disclosures ers of receiving written offers; (4) the
costs to consumers of receiving written
The Board found that disclosing debit
offers, or any adverse effects on con­
fees in real time at a POS terminal (for
sumers from receiving the offers; and
example, showing fee information on a
(5) the potential effects on certain fac­
POS terminal display before a customer
tors, such as the cost and availability
commits to a method of payment) would
of credit, if further restrictions were
involve the most extensive changes to
imposed on the ability of creditors and
the infrastructure of the payments sys­
insurers to make written offers.
tem. Although such disclosures would
improve consumers’ knowledge of debit
fees, these improvements would be Availability and Use of
achieved at extremely high costs. Opt-Out Provisions
The Board found that currently about
Board Study of Prescreened 6 percent of consumers with credit
Solicitations under the Fair Credit records have opted out of receiving pre-
Reporting Act screened written offers of credit or insur­
ance. Further, most consumers who elect
In December, the Board issued a report to opt out use the statutory mechanisms
to Congress summarizing the Board’s provided in section 604 of the FCRA,
study of unsolicited written offers of which governs the use of prescreening
credit or insurance in which the sender techniques. Beyond that statutory provi­
of the offer has prescreened the recip­ sion, industry groups and individual
ients for creditworthiness and suit­ companies have voluntarily established
ability on the basis of consumer credit ways for consumers to eliminate their
records in the files of consumer report­ name from the listings companies use
ing agencies. The FCRA allows con­ to make prescreened written offers of
sumer credit records to be used for these credit or insurance. These voluntary
so-called prescreened solicitations. In mechanisms are important in the mar­
section 213(e) of the FACT Act, Con­ ketplace; an estimated one-third of the

60 91st Annual Report, 2004
individuals on the opt-out lists of the The Board found that prescreened
national consumer reporting agencies written solicitations for credit and insur­
used a voluntary mechanism to request ance carry some potential costs for con­
that their personal information not be sumers, including the inconvenience of
used for prescreened offers. receiving unwanted mail, the possibil­
ity of identity theft, the possible loss of
privacy, and the potential for additional
Benefits and Costs of Receiving
debt burden. Although these are impor­
Written Offers
tant considerations, the Board did not
The Board found that the benefits to find that restricting written offers of
consumers of receiving prescreened credit or insurance would mitigate these
written offers of credit or insurance are problems; the alternatives to prescreen­
significant. Because prescreened offers ing may even exacerbate some of them.
must be ‘‘firm offers’’ of credit or insur­
ance, a consumer generally receives Potential Effects of
offers for only those products for which Further Restrictions
he or she is likely qualified. Conse­
The Board found that written offers of
quently, consumers shopping for credit
credit or insurance sent directly to con­
or insurance are able to quickly iden­
sumers have the potential to increase
tify products suitable for them. These
competition in the market for those
prescreened offers also contain pricing
consumer financial services. The pri­
and product information, often in a form
mary benefits of competition are lower
that allows a consumer to compare the
prices and an increased availability of
terms of products offered with those of
the product or service in question. As a
accounts he or she already holds—and
result, the Board concluded that actions
with products offered by other compa­
undertaken to restrict the ability of lend­
nies. Thus, the widespread availability
ers and insurers to provide written offers
of pricing and product information in
of credit or insurance to consumers
prescreened offers helps to make the
would, on balance, result in a less com­
market for these products more com­
petitive marketplace and thus relatively
petitive, an advantage that benefits all
higher prices and the reduced availabil­
consumers.
ity of credit or insurance.
For creditors and insurers, the ability
to tailor offers of credit or insurance
to consumers’ pricing and product
Other Regulatory Actions
preferences at a relatively low cost
enhances competition and marketing The Board also took the following regu­
efficiency. Moreover, by having access latory actions during 2004:
to credit record information for the pur­
poses of prescreening, creditors and • In March, the Board revised Regu­
insurers are better able to control certain lation Z (Truth in Lending) and its
risks related to offering these products. official staff commentary to add an
In a competitive market, cost savings interpretative rule of construction
for creditors and insurers translate into clarifying that the word ‘‘amount’’
lower prices and wider credit and insur­ referred to a numerical amount. The
ance availability for consumers, possi­ revisions also provided guidance
bly benefiting traditionally underserved on consumers’ exercise of rescission
consumers. rights for certain home-secured loans.

Consumer and Community Affairs 61
• In July, the Board and the other • In December, the Board raised to
federal financial regulatory agencies $34 million the exemption threshold
issued joint interim final rules contain­ for depository institutions required
ing technical changes to their regu­ to collect data in 2005 under HMDA
lations implementing the Commu­ and Regulation C. As prescribed by
nity Reinvestment Act (CRA). The the statute, the increased threshold
changes conform those regulations reflects changes in the consumer price
to changes in (1) the Standards for index.
Defining Metropolitan and Micropoli­
tan Statistical Areas, published by the
Economic Effects of the
U.S. Office of Management and Bud­
Electronic Fund Transfer Act
get in December 2000; (2) the census
tracts designated by the U.S. Bureau As required by the Electronic Fund
of the Census; and (3) the Board’s Transfer Act (EFTA), the Board moni­
Regulation C, which implements tors the effects of the act on the costs of
the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act compliance to financial institutions and
(HMDA). The joint interim rules did the benefits of the act to consumers.
not make substantive changes in the According to data from the most
requirements of the CRA regulations. recent triennial Survey of Consumer
The Board’s regulation implementing Finances (conducted in 2001), approxi­
the CRA is Regulation BB. mately 88 percent of U.S. families in
that year used or had access to one or
• In August, the Board amended the more EFT services—for example, an
official staff commentary to Regula­ ATM card, a debit card, direct deposit,
tion Z to raise from $499 to $510 the or direct payment—up from approxi­
total dollar amount of points and fees mately 85 percent in 1998. ATMs were
that triggers additional requirements the most widely used EFT service;
for certain mortgage loans under the approximately 70 percent of U.S. fami­
Home Ownership and Equity Protec­ lies had an ATM card. In 2003, the
tion Act. As prescribed by the statute, number of ATM transactions per month
the increased amount (effective Janu­ averaged approximately 902 million,
ary 2005) reflects changes in the con­ and the number of installed ATMs
sumer price index. rose nearly 5.4 percent from 2002, to
371,000.
• In December, the Board issued a final Direct deposit was almost as widely
rule revising disclosure tables the used. About 67 percent of U.S. families
Board and the other federal financial had funds deposited directly into their
regulatory agencies use to publicly checking or savings account. Use of the
release data collected by lenders service is particularly common in the
under HMDA and the Board’s Regu­ public sector; during fiscal year 2004,
lation C. In particular, the final rule approximately 75 percent of all govern­
revised the formats for some of the ment payments were made using EFT,
existing disclosure tables, deleted one including 81 percent of Social Security
set of existing tables, and added new payments, 98 percent of federal salary
tables. These changes reflect the and retirement payments, and 45 percent
Board’s 2002 revisions to Regula­ of federal income tax refunds.
tion C that required lenders to collect About 47 percent of U.S. families use
new data beginning January 1, 2004. debit cards, which consumers can use at

62 91st Annual Report, 2004
merchant terminals to pay for purchases. • disseminates information on commu­
Approximately 16.2 billion debit card nity development techniques to bank­
transactions took place in 2003, an ers and the public through Community
increase of approximately 21 percent Affairs Offices at the Reserve Banks.
from the previous year’s volume. Direct
payment is a less widely used EFT pay­ Examinations for Compliance
ment mechanism; about 40 percent of with the CRA
U.S. families have payments automati­
The Federal Reserve assesses and rates
cally deducted from their accounts.
the CRA performance of state mem­
The incremental costs associated with
ber banks in the course of examina­
the EFTA are difficult to quantify
tions conducted by staff at the twelve
because no one knows how industry
Reserve Banks. During the 2004 report­
practices would have evolved in the
ing period, the Reserve Banks con­
absence of statutory requirements. The
ducted 242 CRA examinations. Of the
benefits of the EFTA are also difficult to
banks examined, 43 were rated ‘‘out­
measure, as they cannot be isolated from
standing’’ in meeting community credit
consumer protections that would have
needs, 198 were rated ‘‘satisfactory,’’
been provided in the absence of regula­
none was rated ‘‘needs to improve,’’ and
tion. The available evidence suggests no
1 was rated as being in ‘‘substantial
serious consumer problems with EFTA.
noncompliance.’’1
(See ‘‘Agency Reports on Compliance
with Consumer Protection Laws’’ later
Analysis of Applications for
in this chapter.)
Mergers and Acquisitions in
Relation to the CRA
Supervision for Compliance Under the Bank Holding Company Act
with Consumer Protection and and the Bank Merger Act, the Board
Community Reinvestment Laws considers applications for which CRA
protests are raised or significant issues
Activities Related to the exist regarding CRA or consumer
Community Reinvestment Act compliance. Other cases are decided
by the Reserve Banks under delegated
The Community Reinvestment Act authority.
(CRA) requires that the Board and other During 2004, the Board of Governors
banking agencies encourage financial considered applications for several sig­
institutions to help meet the credit needs nificant banking mergers and acquisi­
of the local communities in which they tions. The Board sponsored four pub­
do business, consistent with safe and lic meetings in connection with two of
sound business practices. To carry out these applications. For the application
this mandate, the Federal Reserve by Bank of America Corporation (Char­
lotte, North Carolina) to acquire Fleet
• examines state member banks to Financial Group, Inc. (Boston, Massa­
assess their compliance with the CRA, chusetts), public meetings were held at
the Federal Reserve Banks of Boston
• analyzes applications for mergers and and San Francisco. Two public meetings
acquisitions by state member banks
and bank holding companies in rela­
1. The 2004 reporting period was July 1, 2003,
tion to CRA performance, and through June 30, 2004.

Consumer and Community Affairs 63
were held at the Federal Reserve Banks The public submitted comments on
of New York and Chicago in connection each of these applications. Most of the
with the merger of J.P. Morgan Chase & commenters expressed concerns that
Company (New York, New York) with lending to lower-income communities
Bank One Corporation (Chicago, Illi­ and populations was insufficient and that
nois). Members of the public submitted the institutions had failed to address the
numerous comments on these two appli­ convenience and needs of affected com­
cations during the thirty-day comment munities. Commenters also raised issues
period allocated for such applications. relating to potentially abusive lending
The public meetings, however, allowed practices involving subprime and pay­
the public to enter oral or written testi­ day lenders; the potentially adverse
mony into the record of information effects of branch closings; the failure of
considered by the Board. The Board minority-owned and -operated institu­
approved the application by Bank of tions to adequately serve other minority
America Corporation in March and the populations; the loss of local ownership;
application by J.P. Morgan Chase & institutions’ alleged attempts to circum­
Company in June. Several other sig­ vent state consumer laws; and alleged
nificant applications are summarized fraud.
below. In addition to considering these appli­
cations for significant banking mergers
• An application by NewAlliance Banc­ and acquisitions, the Board acted on
shares (New Haven, Connecticut) to thirteen other bank and bank holding
acquire New Haven Savings Bank company applications that involved pro­
(New Haven, Connecticut) was tests by members of the public con­
approved in February. cerning the performance under the CRA
of insured depository institutions. The
• Three applications by National City System also approved one application
Corporation (Cleveland, Ohio) were that involved an institution having a
approved in March, June, and August. CRA rating of lower than satisfactory
and another thirty-three applications
• An application by Regions Financial involving other issues related to CRA,
Corporation (Birmingham, Alabama) fair lending, or compliance with con­
to acquire Union Planters Corporation sumer credit protection laws.2
(Memphis, Tennessee) was approved
in June.
Other Consumer Compliance
Activities
• An application by Royal Bank of
Scotland and Citizens Financial Group The Division of Consumer and Com­
(both in Providence, Rhode Island) to munity Affairs supports and oversees
acquire Charter One Financial Group, the supervisory efforts of the Federal
Inc. (Cleveland, Ohio), was approved Reserve Banks to ensure that consumer
in August. protection laws and regulations are fully
and fairly enforced. Division staff pro­
• An application by Wachovia Corpo­ vide guidance and expertise to the
ration (Charlotte, North Carolina) to Reserve Banks on consumer protection
acquire SouthTrust Corporation (Bir­
mingham, Alabama) was approved in
2. In addition, five applications involving other
October. CRA or compliance issues were withdrawn.

64 91st Annual Report, 2004
regulations, examination and enforce­ ciated with the rapid changes in elec­
ment techniques, examiner training, and tronic banking.
emerging issues. They develop and
update examination policies, proce­
Fair Lending
dures, and guidelines, and review
Reserve Bank supervisory reports and The Board has a responsibility to ensure
work products. They also participate in that the banks under its jurisdiction com­
interagency activities that promote uni­ ply with the federal fair lending laws—
formity in examination principles and the Equal Credit Opportunity Act
standards. (ECOA) and the Fair Housing Act. The
Examinations are the Federal Re­ ECOA prohibits all creditors from dis­
serve’s primary means of enforcing criminating against any applicant, in
compliance with consumer protection any aspect of a credit transaction, on the
laws. During the 2004 reporting period, basis of race, color, religion, national
the Reserve Banks conducted 329 con­ origin, sex, marital status, or age. In
sumer compliance examinations—305 addition, creditors may not discriminate
of state member banks and 24 of foreign against an applicant because the appli­
banking organizations (FBOs).3 cant receives income from a public
The Board periodically issues guid­ assistance program or has exercised,
ance for Reserve Bank examiners on in good faith, any right under the Con­
consumer protection laws and regula­ sumer Credit Protection Act. As pro­
tions. In addition to updating examina­ vided by the ECOA, the Board enacted
tion procedures for a number of regula­ Regulation B to fully implement the act
tions in concert with the other federal for the banks under its jurisdiction and
financial institution regulatory agen­ periodically reviews that regulation
cies, the Board revised the procedures and modifies it as needed. Congress
that Federal Reserve consumer compli­ assigned responsibility for administra­
ance examiners are to use when assess­ tive enforcement of the ECOA to the
ing whether a compliance or CRA Board for banks under its jurisdiction, to
examination of an FBO or special- other regulators for creditors that they
purpose bank is necessary. Further, the regulate, and to the Federal Trade Com­
Board updated its risk-focused supervi­ mission for all other creditors.
sion program to reflect new regulations The Fair Housing Act covers credit
and the level of risk associated with for the purchase, construction, improve­
existing regulations. The Board also ment, repair, or maintenance of a dwell­
completed a pilot program for an inter­ ing. Under the act, it is unlawful for
disciplinary electronic banking profile a creditor to deny any form of financial
to identify and monitor risk factors asso­ assistance, or discriminate in fixing the
amount, interest rate, or any other terms
or conditions of any financial assistance,
3. The foreign banking organizations examined on the basis of race, color, religion,
by the Federal Reserve are organizations operating
national origin, handicap, familial sta­
under section 25 or 25A of the Federal Reserve
Act (Edge Act and agreement corporations) and tus, or sex.
state-chartered commercial lending companies The ECOA also obligates the Board
owned or controlled by foreign banks. These insti­ and other agencies with enforcement
tutions are not subject to the Community Reinvest­
responsibilities under the act to refer
ment Act and typically engage in relatively few
any pattern or practice of ECOA viola­
activities that are covered by consumer protection
laws. tions to the Department of Justice

Consumer and Community Affairs 65
(DOJ). When a violation of the ECOA that have an unintended but unjustified
also violates the Fair Housing Act, the discriminatory ‘‘disparate impact.’’ In
matter may be referred to the Depart­ 2004, division staff determined that a
ment of Housing and Urban Develop­ lender’s adoption of a ‘‘housing proxy’’
ment. To promote consistency in how debt payment constituted a disparate-
fair lending issues are analyzed through­ impact violation of the ECOA on the
out the System, Division of Consumer basis of the prohibited characteristic of
and Community Affairs staff coordinate age. The lender had been adding a multi-
the investigation of potential fair lend­ hundred-dollar payment to the monthly
ing violations with Reserve Bank staff debt of persons who applied for credit
and develop recommendations for the but reported no housing cost on their
division director regarding whether loan application—and for whom no
referral is necessary or appropriate. housing cost appeared on their credit
During 2004, division staff received bureau report. This proxy practice was
and analyzed six reports from Reserve shown to adversely affect a dispropor­
Banks regarding possible referral mat­ tionate number of younger applicants,
ters. Four of these reports had to do with and the lender failed to demonstrate an
potentially discriminatory underwriting adequate ‘‘business-necessity’’ justifica­
standards affecting applicants on the tion for its adoption of the proxy.
basis of marital status or sex; the other Since 1994, the Federal Reserve has
two matters involved apparent discrimi­ used a two-stage statistical regression
natory loan-pricing practices on the program to help assess fair lending com­
basis of marital status. In two of the six pliance by high-volume mortgage lend­
cases, the Board determined that refer­ ers. The program uses reported HMDA
rals were not warranted; two cases were data for a stage one analysis to identify
referred to the DOJ; and two cases are banks having significant disparities in
pending. their loan-denial rates for loan applica­
In early 2004, division staff, together tions submitted by members of a pro­
with staff from the Board’s Legal Divi­ tected class and those submitted by
sion and the Federal Reserve Bank of members of a nonprotected class; the
New York, negotiated a consent order program then targets these banks for a
to finalize an investigation of a major stage two analysis that considers exten­
holding company subsidiary. The order sive additional information taken from
addressed issues raised during the inves­ a sample of a bank’s loan files. The
tigation, including regulatory compli­ program produces statistically reliable
ance violations, the making of loans that results, even in cases in which the num­
were unsafe and unsound and that bor­ ber of denied applicants in a protected
rowers could not afford, and misleading class is small.
and incorrect statements made by lend­
ing personnel to examiners. In addition
Flood Insurance
to a substantial civil money penalty, the
consent order provided for extensive The National Flood Insurance Act
corrective measures, including the pay­ imposes certain requirements on loans
ment of restitution to victims. secured by buildings or mobile homes
The ECOA prohibits not only prac­ located in, or to be located in, areas
tices that constitute intentional discrimi­ determined to have special flood haz­
natory treatment of credit applicants ards. Under the Federal Reserve’s Regu­
on a prohibited basis but also practices lation H, which implements the act, state

66 91st Annual Report, 2004
member banks in general are prohibited developed a Check 21 web site to pro­
from making, extending, increasing, vide examiners and the financial indus­
or renewing any such loan unless the try with educational tools, reference
building or mobile home and any per­ materials, and answers to frequently
sonal property securing the loan are cov­ asked questions (www.ffiec.gov/exam/
ered by flood insurance for the term of check21).
the loan. The act requires the Federal The FFIEC also issues guidance to
Reserve to impose civil money penalties the agencies’ consumer compliance
when it finds a pattern or practice of examination staff and to supervised
violations of the regulation. The civil financial institutions. To ensure that
money penalties are turned over to CRA performance evaluations are com­
the Federal Emergency Management prehensive and include facts and data
Agency for deposit into the National to support the evaluation results, the
Flood Mitigation Fund. FFIEC in 2004 developed interagency
During 2004, the Board imposed civil guidance on examiners’ use of data
money penalties on three state mem­ tables in CRA evaluations. Additionally,
ber banks. The penalties, which were the FFIEC member agencies developed
assessed via consent orders, ranged from interagency guidance on overdraft pro­
$3,250 to $10,000. tection programs, which was released
for public comment in 2004. Finally,
Coordination with in response to a review of preliminary
Other Federal Banking Agencies 2004 HMDA data submissions, the
FFIEC issued guidance to HMDA data
The member agencies of the Federal
reporters regarding proper collection
Financial Institutions Examination
and reporting of the new data fields
Council (FFIEC) develop uniform
being collected for the first time in 2004.
examination principles, standards, pro­
The Board and the FDIC issued joint
cedures, and report formats.4 In 2004,
guidance outlining standards the two
the FFIEC issued revised examination
agencies will consider when determin­
procedures for determining compliance
ing whether specific acts or practices
with the fair lending provisions of Regu­
at state-chartered banks are unfair or
lation B (which implements the Equal
deceptive. The Board, the OCC, and the
Credit Opportunity Act), the Homeown­
FDIC also updated the host-state loan-
ers Protection Act, and the new sub­
to-deposit ratios used to determine com­
part D of Regulation CC. Subpart D
pliance with section 109 of the Riegle–
implements the Check Clearing for the
Neal Interstate Banking and Branching
21st Century Act, or Check 21. (Regu­
Efficiency Act of 1994.
lation CC continues to implement the
Expedited Funds Availability Act.) In
addition to issuing revised examination Training for Bank Examiners
procedures to implement Check 21,
Ensuring that financial institutions com­
staff from the FFIEC member agencies
ply with laws that protect consumers
and encourage community reinvestment
4. The FFIEC member agencies are the Board is an important part of the bank exami­
of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, the nation and supervisory process. As the
Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation, the Office
number and complexity of consumer
of the Comptroller of the Currency, the Office of
financial transactions grow, training for
Thrift Supervision, and the National Credit Union
Administration. examiners of the state member banks for

Consumer and Community Affairs 67
which the Federal Reserve has supervi­ In 2004, the consumer affairs function
sory responsibility becomes even more added a new course to the core curricu­
important. The consumer affairs curricu­ lum, Consumer Affairs Risk-Focused
lum comprises courses on various con­ Examination Techniques. The course is
sumer protection laws, regulations, and designed to enhance examiners’ analyti­
examining concepts. In 2004, these cal, decisionmaking, and leadership
courses were offered in eleven sessions skills.
to more than 225 Federal Reserve con­ In addition to providing core training,
sumer compliance examiners. the examiner curriculum emphasizes the
Board and Reserve Bank staff reg­ importance of continuing professional
ularly review the core curriculum for development. Opportunities for continu­
examiner training, updating subject mat­ ing development include special projects
ter and adding new elements as appro­ and assignments, self-study programs,
priate. During 2004, staff conducted rotational assignments, the opportunity
curriculum reviews for two courses to to instruct at System schools, and men­
incorporate technical changes in policy toring programs.
and laws, along with changes in instruc­
tional delivery techniques. The two
Reporting on Home Mortgage
courses reviewed were
Disclosure Act Data
• Community Reinvestment Act Exami­ The Home Mortgage Disclosure Act
nation Techniques. Equips assistant (HMDA) requires that mortgage lenders
examiners and others to write the per­ collect and make public certain data
formance evaluation for the CRA por­ about their home purchase, home
tion of a consumer compliance bank improvement, and refinancing loan
examination. transactions. A depository institution
generally is covered by the act if (1) it is
• Commercial Lending Essentials for located in a metropolitan statistical area,
Consumer Affairs. Equips assistant (2) it met the asset threshold at the end
examiners with the basic techniques of the preceding calendar year (for 2002
to underwrite and price commercial and 2003, assets of more than $32 mil­
loans. lion; for 2004, assets of more than
$33 million), and (3) it originated at
Staff members also look for opportu­ least one home purchase loan (or refi­
nities to deliver courses via alternative nancing) in the preceding calendar year.
channels such as the Internet or other A for-profit mortgage company is cov­
distance-learning technologies. The two ered if (1) it has offices in a metropoli­
courses discussed above are now taught tan statistical area, (2) it had assets of
using several instructional methods: more than $10 million (when combined
classroom instruction focusing on case with the assets of any parent company)
studies, specially developed computer- at the end of the preceding calendar
based instruction, electronic bulletin year or it originated 100 or more
boards, and vendor-delivered online home purchase loans or refinancings in
instruction. Additionally, the new exam­ the preceding calendar year, and (3) in
iner training on the consumer compli­ the preceding calendar year, its home
ance aspects of the Check 21 Act was purchase loan originations and refinanc­
delivered on both an interactive web site ings accounted for at least 10 per­
and an interactive CD-ROM. cent of its total loans by dollar vol­

68 91st Annual Report, 2004
ume, or if such loans equaled at least tions of lending discrimination and in
$25 million. targeting lenders for further inquiry.
In 2004, a total of 6,935 depository The HMDA data reported for 2003
institutions and affiliated mortgage com­ covered about 42 million loans and loan
panies and 1,186 independent mortgage applications, about 33 percent more than
companies reported HMDA data for in 2002. The greater volume was due
calendar year 2003. Lenders submitted primarily to an increase of about 41 per­
information about the disposition of loan cent in refinancing activity. The num­
applications, the geographic location of ber of covered home purchase loans
the properties related to loans and loan extended in 2003, compared with 2002,
applications, and, in most cases, the race increased 16 percent for Asians, 18 per­
or national origin, income, and sex of cent for Hispanics, 15 percent for
applicants and borrowers. The FFIEC blacks, and 11 percent for whites.
processed the data and produced disclo­ Native Americans experienced a 5 per­
sure statements on behalf of the FFIEC cent decline in such lending from 2002
member agencies and the Department through 2003. Over the period from
of Housing and Urban Development 1993 through 2003, the number of home
(HUD). purchase loans extended to Hispanics
The FFIEC prepared individual dis­ rose 236 percent; to Asians, 163 per­
closure statements for each lender that cent; to blacks, 106 percent; to Native
reported data—one statement for each Americans, 50 percent; and to whites,
metropolitan statistical area in which the 44 percent. For each income category,
lender had offices and reported loan the number of home purchase loans
activity for 2003. In 2004, the FFIEC reported was higher in 2003 than in
prepared 65,808 disclosure statements.5 2002; the increase was 6 percent for
In July, each institution made its disclo­ lower-income applicants; 8.6 percent for
sure statement public, and reports con­ middle-income applicants; and 13 per­
taining aggregate data for all mortgage cent for upper-income applicants. From
and home improvement loans in each of 1993 through 2003, the number of home
the 337 metropolitan statistical areas in purchase loans to lower-, middle-, and
the United States were also made avail­ upper-income applicants increased by
able to the public at central deposi­ 102 percent, 68 percent, and 88 percent,
tories.6 These data are used by the respectively.
FFIEC agencies, the reporting institu­ In 2003, 19 percent of Hispanic appli­
tions, HUD, the Department of Justice cants and 21 percent of black appli­
(DOJ), and members of the public. They cants for home purchase loans reported
also assist HUD, the DOJ, and state and under HMDA applied for government-
local agencies in responding to allega­ backed mortgages; the comparable fig­
ures for Asians, whites, and Native
Americans were 4 percent, 12 percent,
5. The FFIEC also compiles information on and 15 percent, respectively. Twenty-
applications for private mortgage insurance (PMI)
one percent of lower-income applicants
similar to the information on home mortgage lend­
ing collected under HMDA. Lenders typically for home purchase loans, compared
require PMI for conventional mortgages that with 5 percent of upper-income appli­
involve small down payments. cants, applied for government-backed
6. Central depository sites include libraries,
mortgages.
universities, and city planning offices. A list of
Overall, the denial rate in 2003 for
sites can be found at www.ffiec.gov/hmdacf/
centdep/default2.cfm. conventional home purchase loans

Consumer and Community Affairs 69
(that is, loans that are not government- • note on the application form when
backed) was 14 percent, a rate un­ an applicant chooses not to provide
changed from 2002. The denial rate monitoring information regarding race
rose from 1993 through 1998 but has or national origin and sex
fallen since then. In 2003, denial rates
for conventional home purchase loans • notify the credit applicant of the
reported under HMDA declined slightly action taken within the time frames
for black applicants, to 24 percent; the specified in the regulation
rates rose modestly for Native Ameri­
cans and Asians, to 24 percent and • provide a written notice of credit
11 percent, respectively. Denial rates for denial or other adverse action contain­
whites and Hispanics remained the same ing a statement of the action taken, the
from 2002 to 2003, at 12 percent and name and address of the creditor, a
18 percent, respectively. notice of rights, and the name and
address of the federal agency that
enforces compliance
Agency Reports on Compliance
with Consumer Protection Laws
• collect information for monitoring
The Board reports annually on compli­ purposes about the race, color, reli­
ance with consumer protection laws by gion, national origin, or sex of an
entities supervised by federal agencies. applicant
This section summarizes data collected
from the twelve Federal Reserve Banks, During 2004, the Federal Trade Com­
the FFIEC member agencies, and other mission (FTC) entered into one settle­
federal enforcement agencies.7 ment with a telecommunications cor­
poration for alleged violations of the
Regulation B ECOA and Regulation B. The defen­
(Equal Credit Opportunity) dants were required to pay civil money
penalties of $1.125 million and provide
The FFIEC agencies reported that
injunctive relief. Additionally, the FTC
88 percent of the institutions examined
continued litigation against a mort­
during the 2004 reporting period were in
gage lender for alleged violations of the
compliance with Regulation B, com­
ECOA and Regulation B, and continued
pared with 84 percent for the 2003
its enforcement efforts against other
reporting period. The most frequent vio­
organizations.
lations involved failure to take one or
The other agencies that enforce
more of the following actions:
the ECOA—the Farm Credit Admin­
istration (FCA), the Department of
• collect information for monitoring
Transportation, the Securities and
purposes about the race or national
Exchange Commission, the Small Bus­
origin and sex of applicants seeking
iness Administration, and the Grain
credit primarily for the purchase or
Inspection, Packers and Stockyards
refinancing of a principal residence
Administration of the Department of
Agriculture—reported substantial com­
7. Because the agencies use different methods pliance among the entities they super­
to compile the data, the information presented
vise. The FCA’s examination and
here supports only general conclusions. The 2004
enforcement activities revealed that
reporting period was July 1, 2003, through
June 30, 2004. most Regulation B violations involved

70 91st Annual Report, 2004
creditors’ providing inadequate state­ In 2004, the FTC settled two cases in
ments of specific reasons for denial federal district court involving viola­
or involved creditors’ failure to request tions of the Electronic Fund Transfer
or provide information for government- Act (EFTA). In one case, the complaint
monitoring purposes. These agencies alleged that the defendants had decep­
did not initiate any formal enforcement tively marketed videos and charged
actions relating to Regulation B during consumers’ credit and debit cards on a
2004, although the FCA indicated that recurring basis, without obtaining writ­
its supervisory process requires correc­ ten authorization from the consumers to
tive actions for violations noted. initiate preauthorized electronic fund
transfers from their accounts, in viola­
Regulation E tion of the EFTA. Under the stipulated
(Electronic Fund Transfers) court order in this case, defendants were
required to pay approximately $1.1 mil­
The FFIEC agencies reported that
lion in combined consumer redress and
approximately 95 percent of the institu­
civil penalties and were barred from a
tions examined during the 2004 report­
range of unlawful activities. In the sec­
ing period were in compliance with
ond case, the complaint alleged that the
Regulation E, compared with 94 per­
defendants initiated recurring automatic
cent for the 2003 reporting period.
charges from consumers’ accounts at the
The most frequent violations involved
conclusion of a ‘‘free’’ trial period asso­
failure to comply with the following
ciated with a variety of offered services,
requirements:
without disclosing the cancellation
policy or obtaining the consumers’
• determine whether an error occurred, written authorization. The court order in
and transmit the results of the inves­ this case included injunctive relief and
tigation to the consumer within ten required payment of $2.4 million.
business days
Regulation M
• when a determination is made that no (Consumer Leasing)
error has occurred, provide a written
The FFIEC agencies reported that more
explanation and note the consumer’s
than 99 percent of the institutions exam­
right to request documentation sup­
ined during the 2004 reporting period
porting the institution’s findings
were in compliance with Regulation M,
which is comparable to the level of com­
• provide initial disclosures that a con­
pliance for the 2003 reporting period.
sumer may retain, at the time he or
The few violations noted involved fail­
she contracts for an electronic fund
ure to adhere to specific disclosure
transfer service or before the first
requirements. The agencies did not issue
electronic fund transfer involving the
any formal enforcement actions relating
consumer’s account is made
to Regulation M during the period.
• provide initial disclosures at the time
Regulation P
a consumer contracts for an electronic
(Privacy of Consumer
fund transfer service that contain
Financial Information)
required information, including limi­
tations on the types of transfers per­ The FFIEC agencies reported that
mitted and error-resolution procedures 96 percent of the institutions exam­

Consumer and Community Affairs 71
ined during the 2004 reporting period summation, or not later than three
were in compliance with Regulation P, business days after receipt of the loan
compared with 97 percent for the 2003 application
reporting period. The most frequent vio­
lations involved failure to comply with
• ensure that disclosures reflect the
the following requirements:
terms of the legal obligation between
the parties, and when any informa­
• provide a clear and conspicuous initial tion necessary for an accurate disclo­
privacy notice to customers that accu­ sure is unknown, ensure that the credi­
rately reflects the institution’s privacy tor states that the disclosure is an
policies and practices, not later than estimate
when the customer relationship is
established
• ensure that disclosures reflect that the
creditor has or will acquire a security
• provide a clear and conspicuous
interest in the property identified
annual privacy notice to customers
The OCC issued one formal enforce­
• disclose the institution’s information-
ment action containing provisions relat­
sharing practices in initial, annual, and
ing to Regulation Z during the 2004
revised privacy notices
reporting period. In addition, 114 insti­
tutions supervised by the Federal
No formal enforcement actions relat­
Reserve and the FDIC were required,
ing to Regulation P were issued during
under the Interagency Enforcement
the reporting period.
Policy on Regulation Z, to refund a
total of approximately $500,000 to
Regulation Z consumers.
(Truth in Lending) The FTC continued its enforcement
activities to halt unlawful subprime­
The FFIEC agencies reported that
lending practices. The FTC filed two
84 percent of the institutions examined
federal district court actions (currently
during the 2004 reporting period were
in litigation) and continued litigating
in compliance with Regulation Z, com­
three cases; all five cases concern
pared with 78 percent for the 2003
alleged violations of the Truth in Lend­
reporting period. The most frequent vio­
ing Act, Regulation Z, and the Fed­
lations involved failure to take one or
eral Trade Commission Act. The defen­
more of the following actions:
dants in these cases include mort­
gage brokers, a mortgage corporation, a
• accurately disclose the finance charge, finance company, and a tax-shelter con­
using that term, and provide a brief sulting firm.
definition of ‘‘finance charge’’ The FCA’s examination and enforce­
ment activities revealed that most Regu­
• accurately disclose the payment lation Z violations involved inadequate
schedule for closed-end credit or incorrect disclosures for closed-end
credit. FCA examiners determined that
• on certain residential mortgage trans­ all violations had been or were being
actions, provide a good faith estimate corrected or adequately addressed by the
of the required disclosures before con­ respective institutions.

72 91st Annual Report, 2004
Regulation AA amount of checks deposited that are
(Unfair or Deceptive Acts not subject to next-day availability
or Practices)
• follow special procedures when
The three banking regulators with
invoking the exception for large-dollar
responsibility for enforcing Regula­
deposits
tion AA’s Credit Practices Rule—the
Federal Reserve, the OCC, and the
• when placing an exception hold on an
FDIC—along with the NCUA, reported
account other than a new account, pro­
that more than 99 percent of the institu­
vide the customer with a notice con­
tions examined during the 2004 report­
taining certain information within pre­
ing period were in compliance with
scribed time periods
Regulation AA, which is comparable
to the level of compliance for the 2003
reporting period. The few violations • make funds from certain checks, both
involved the following actions: local and nonlocal, available for with­
drawal within the times prescribed by
• failing to provide a clear and con­ the regulation
spicuous disclosure regarding a
cosigner’s liability for a debt • provide training to each employee
that performs duties subject to this
• entering into a consumer credit obliga­ regulation, and establish procedures
tion that contains a waiver of exemp­ to ensure and monitor employee
tion, or enforcing provisions in a pur­ compliance
chased consumer credit obligation that
contains such a waiver, unless the No formal enforcement actions relat­
waiver applies solely to property sub­ ing to Regulation CC were issued dur­
ject to a security interest executed in ing the reporting period.
connection with the obligation
Regulation DD
No formal enforcement actions relat­
(Truth in Savings)
ing to Regulation AA were issued dur­
ing the reporting period. The FFIEC agencies reported that
92 percent of institutions examined
Regulation CC during the 2004 reporting period were
(Availability of Funds and in compliance with Regulation DD,
Collection of Checks) compared with 89 percent for the
2003 reporting period. Among the
The FFIEC agencies reported that
institutions not in full compliance,
93 percent of institutions examined dur­
the most frequently cited violations
ing the 2004 reporting period were in
involved
compliance with Regulation CC, com­
pared with 90 percent for the 2003
reporting period. Among the institutions • using the phrase ‘‘annual percentage
not in full compliance, the most fre­ yield’’ in an advertisement without
quently cited violations involved the disclosing additional terms and condi­
failure to take one or more of the follow­ tions of customer accounts;
ing actions:
• failing to provide account disclo­
• make available on the next business sures containing certain required
day the lesser of $100 or the aggregate information;

Consumer and Community Affairs 73
• failing to provide timely maturity noti­ the scope of complaint investigations
fication for time deposits; and improve the quality and timeliness
of responses to consumers.
• failing to provide account disclosures During 2004, the CAESAR Users
clearly and conspicuously, in writing, Advisory Group finalized business and
and in a form that the consumer may technical requirements for a web-based
keep; and CAESAR application that will stream­
line the System’s consumer complaint
• providing an advertisement that did process. These requirements entailed the
not disclose that fees could reduce the development of new reports for analyz­
earnings on the account. ing and monitoring complaint trends. In
addition, the advisory group developed
No formal enforcement actions relat­ a new consumer code structure for the
ing to Regulation DD were issued dur­ web-based system to allow users to clas­
ing the reporting period. sify consumer complaints in more detail
and identify investigation findings more
easily.
Consumer Complaints
The Federal Reserve investigates com­ Complaints against
plaints against state member banks State Member Banks
and forwards to the appropriate enforce­
ment agency complaints that involve In 2004 the Federal Reserve received
other creditors and businesses. Each approximately 5,130 complaints from
Reserve Bank investigates complaints consumers—by mail, by telephone, in
against state member banks in its Dis­ person, and electronically via the Inter­
trict. Complaints and inquiries received net (see tables). About 45 percent of the
by the Federal Reserve System are
entered into its online database, Com­
Consumer Complaints against State
plaint Analysis Evaluation System and Member Banks, by Classification, 2004
Reports (CAESAR).
The Board provides guidance to the
Classification Number
Reserve Banks on complaint program
policies and procedures through advi­ Regulation B (Equal Credit Opportunity) . . . 36
sory letters and periodic updates to the Regulation C (Home Mortgage
Disclosure Act) ....................... 1
Consumer Complaint Manual. In 2004, Regulation E (Electronic Fund Transfers) . . . 75
the Board issued guidance about new Regulation H (Bank Sales of Insurance) ..... 2
Regulation M (Consumer Leasing) ......... 0
codes for the CAESAR database. The Regulation P (Privacy of Consumer
new codes will be used to track con­ Financial Information) ................. 17
sumer concerns about emerging issues, Regulation Q (Payment of Interest) ......... 1
Regulation Z (Truth in Lending) ........... 215
such as stored-value cards, reaffirmed
Regulation BB (Community Reinvestment) . 1
debt, the Check Clearing for the Regulation CC (Expedited Funds
Availability) .......................... 25
21st Century Act, and the Fair and Regulation DD (Truth in Savings) .......... 28
Accurate Credit Transactions Act. Addi­ Fair Credit Reporting Act .................. 155
tional guidance on the CAESAR data­ Fair Debt Collection Practices Act .......... 24
base was issued to strengthen the docu­ Fair Housing Act .......................... 3
Flood insurance rules ...................... 11
mentation of complaint investigations. Regulations T, U, and X ................... 4
Real Estate Settlement Procedures Act ...... 12
In addition to the CAESAR guidance,
Unregulated practices ...................... 1,708
the Board issued guidance on new pro­
Total ..................................... 2,318
cedures that are intended to better focus

74 91st Annual Report, 2004
Consumer Complaints against State Member Banks, by Subject of Complaint, 2004
Total Not investigated
Unable
Subject of complaint to obtain Explanation
sufficient of law
Number Percent
information provided
from to consumer
consumer
Loans
Discrimination alleged
Real estate loans .................................. 15 1 1 1
Credit cards ...................................... 13 1 1 1
Other loans ....................................... 8 0 1 1
Other type of complaint
Real estate loans .................................. 463 20 4 35
Credit cards ...................................... 892 38 4 74
Other loans ....................................... 174 8 1 16
Deposits .............................................. 460 20 6 59
Electronic fund transfers ............................... 75 3 1 3
Trust services ......................................... 30 1 8 5
Other ................................................. 188 8 5 30
Total ................................................. 2,318 100 32 225
complaints (2,318) were against state vices, or other practices. Information
member banks. Of the complaints on the outcomes of the investigations
against state member banks, 68 percent of these complaints is provided in the
involved consumer loans: 2 percent table.
alleged discrimination on a basis pro­ During 2004, the Federal Reserve
hibited by law (race, color, religion, System completed the investigation of
national origin, sex, marital status, 125 complaints against state member
age, the fact that the applicant’s income banks that were pending at year-end
comes from a public assistance pro­ 2003, finding no violations of regula­
gram, or the fact that the applicant has tions. In 84 percent of the state member
exercised a right under the Consumer bank complaints investigated in 2004,
Credit Protection Act), and 66 percent the banks had correctly handled a cus­
concerned other credit-related practices, tomer’s account. In 44 percent of these
such as the imposition of annual mem­ cases, the banks nevertheless chose to
bership fees on credit card accounts, the reimburse or otherwise accommodate
amount of interest banks charge on the customer.
credit card accounts, or credit denial The Federal Reserve also handled
on a basis not prohibited by law (for more than 1,600 inquiries about con­
example, credit history or length of sumer credit and banking policies and
residence). Twenty percent of the practices during 2004. In responding
complaints involved disputes about to these inquiries, the Board and the
interest on deposits and other deposit Reserve Banks gave specific explana­
account practices; the remaining tions of laws, regulations, and banking
12 percent concerned disputes about practices and provided relevant printed
electronic fund transfers, trust ser­ materials on consumer issues.

Consumer and Community Affairs 75
Consumer Complaints—Continued
Investigated
Bank legally correct
Factual or Possible
Pending,
contractual bank
No reim­ Goodwill Customer Bank dispute— violation— Matter Withdrawn December 31
reimburse­ in by
bursement error error resolvable bank took
ment or litigation customer
or other only by corrective
other
accommo­ the courts action
accommo­
dation
dation
6 2 0 0 0 1 0 0 4
6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 5
6 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
192 125 0 49 6 13 20 10 9
257 379 1 54 14 5 3 27 74
86 25 0 23 11 1 4 5 2
203 100 0 45 19 4 6 13 5
20 27 0 7 2 10 1 3 1
8 3 0 2 0 0 0 3 1
72 25 0 9 8 2 14 5 18
856 686 1 189 60 36 48 66 119
Unregulated Practices areas, including credit card fraud, the
amount charged for late payments, and
As required by section 18(f) of the Fed­
disputes about the amount withdrawn
eral Trade Commission Act, the Board
from checking accounts.
monitors complaints about banking
practices that are not subject to exist­
Complaint Referrals to HUD
ing regulations, focusing on those that
concern possible unfair or deceptive In accordance with a memorandum of
practices. In 2004 the Board received understanding between HUD and the
approximately 1,700 complaints against federal bank regulatory agencies, in
state member banks that involved 2004 the Federal Reserve referred six
unregulated practices. The categories complaints to HUD that alleged state
that received the most complaints member bank violations of the Fair
involved real estate loans, credit card Housing Act. In five of the six cases
accounts, and checking accounts. Con­ the Federal Reserve’s investigations
sumers most frequently complained revealed no evidence of illegal discrimi­
about escrow account problems (78 nation. The remaining case was pending
complaints); other complaints involved at year-end.
customer service problems (75), debt
collection practices (70), insufficient-
Advice from the
funds charges and procedures (67), loan
Consumer Advisory Council
and deposit account fees (64), and inter­
est rates and terms (61). The remainder The Board’s Consumer Advisory
of the complaints concerned a wide Council—whose members represent
range of unregulated practices in other consumer and community organizations,

76 91st Annual Report, 2004
the financial services industry, academic The Community Reinvestment Act
institutions, and state agencies—advises (CRA) was a topic at each of the three
the Board of Governors on matters con­ meetings. The discussions focused on
cerning laws and regulations that the regulatory changes proposed by the
Board administers and on other issues Board and three other federal financial
related to consumer financial services. institution regulators (the Office of the
Council meetings are open to the public. Comptroller of the Currency, the Office
(For a list of members of the council, of Thrift Supervision, and the Federal
see the section ‘‘Federal Reserve Sys­ Deposit Insurance Corporation). The
tem Organization.’’) agencies proposed changing the criteria
In 2004, the council met in March, for designation as a small bank and add­
June, and October. In March, council ing a caveat that abusive asset-based
members discussed the Board’s proposal lending might reduce a bank’s CRA rat­
to provide more uniform and consistent ing. Some members expressed concern
guidance on what constitutes a ‘‘clear about the proposal to change the criteria
and conspicuous’’ disclosure for its for small-bank designation because a
consumer regulations. The discussion larger number of banks would qualify
focused on whether the standards and for a more limited CRA examination,
guidance in Regulation P, which imple­ and some banks located in rural geogra­
ments the financial privacy provisions phies might not have incentives to
of the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act, could participate in community and economic
be used as the model for providing clear development initiatives. Further, some
and conspicuous standards. While mem­ members asserted that additional regula­
bers applauded the Board’s effort to tion of regulated depository institutions
make disclosures more understand­ is not necessary and should instead be
able, they did not support adopting the targeted at unregulated and unsuper­
Regulation P standard as a means of vised bank affiliates and other loosely
providing more consistent standards supervised organizations.
and guidance for consumer protection In June, council members discussed
disclosures. an ongoing review to identify outdated
The council also discussed the Janu­ and unduly burdensome regulatory
ary 2004 General Accounting Office requirements pursuant to the Economic
(GAO) study on predatory lending. The Growth and Regulatory Paperwork
GAO recommended that Congress con­ Reduction Act of 1996. Members did
sider making certain statutory changes not reach consensus on the necessity
to consumer financial services and fair of the Truth in Lending Act provision
lending laws. Members commented on giving consumers a three-day right to
a proposal that would grant the Board rescind certain mortgage loan trans­
the authority to routinely monitor and, actions before financial institutions dis­
as necessary, examine nonbank mort­ burse the funds, nor did they agree on
gage lending subsidiaries of bank and the importance of Home Mortgage Dis­
financial holding companies to poten­ closure Act data from small banks and
tially deter predatory lending. Members rural areas. Members agreed that the
who supported this proposal believed CRA provisions of the Gramm–Leach–
that the Federal Reserve has the ability Bliley Act, which require financial insti­
and the expertise to conduct rigorous tutions and other community-based
and consistent examinations. Others did organizations that are parties to certain
not favor the recommendation. written CRA agreements to make the

Consumer and Community Affairs 77
agreements available to the public and the Home Ownership and Equity Protec­
their primary regulator, serve no useful tion Act (HOEPA), which was estab­
purpose. Furthermore, the provisions lished to respond to predatory mortgage
have created a data collection and lending practices and to protect consum­
reporting burden for all parties involved ers from these abusive lending practices.
in the agreements. Another topic of dis­ Members had differing opinions on
cussion at the June meeting was the whether state laws or federal legislation
remittance market, or the transfer of is the most effective means of address­
funds by immigrant workers to families ing predatory lending. Some members
and friends in their native countries (see believed that state laws provide the nec­
the related box ‘‘Remittances and Immi­ essary protections for deterring preda­
grant Markets: Opportunities and Chal­ tory lending practices—protections that
lenges’’ later in this chapter). Members HOEPA does not offer. Other members
emphasized the importance of lowering strongly preferred federal legislation
the cost of remittances and of providing that preempts state laws because of its
immigrants with access to banking uniform application and consistency.
services—especially for lower-income The council also discussed proposed
immigrant workers who regularly send amendments to Regulation E, which
money to their home countries. implements the Electronic Fund Trans­
Courtesy overdraft protection, fre­ fer Act. Members commented on a revi­
quently referred to as bounced-check sion that would require that payroll card
protection, was a topic at the June accounts, established on behalf of a con­
and October meetings. The courtesy sumer for the purpose of providing sal­
overdraft-protection services offered by ary, wages, and other employee compen­
some financial institutions are covered sation on a recurring basis, be covered
under the Truth in Savings Act. Some by Regulation E. Specific comments
members had concerns about the ade­ addressed whether periodic statements
quacy of disclosures, the need for addi­ should apply to payroll cards. Some
tional regulatory coverage, and decep­ members agreed that employers issuing
tive marketing practices for these payroll cards either directly or through
services. Council members discussed service providers should provide peri­
whether the Truth in Savings Act or the odic statements to employees. Other
Truth in Lending Act is the most effec­ members noted that payroll cards are a
tive way to inform and protect consum­ low-profit service for financial institu­
ers. Some council members asserted that tions; the additional costs associated
bounced-check protection programs are with providing payroll statements could
short-term extensions of credit that fit discourage institutions from offering the
the definition of credit under the Truth cards.
in Lending Act; others believed that the
programs do not qualify as credit exten­
Promotion of Community
sions because there is no loan applica­
Economic Development in
tion, underwriting, note, or annual per­
Historically Underserved
centage rate calculation in connection
Markets
with the service.
At the October meeting, members During 2004, the community affairs
discussed anti-predatory-lending laws. function within the Federal Reserve Sys­
Members reviewed various state and tem engaged in a variety of initiatives to
federal legislative approaches, including promote community economic develop­

78 91st Annual Report, 2004
ment that benefit low- and moderate- government to improve the level of
income communities and populations. financial literacy among American
The function continued to focus on consumers. In October, the web site
financial literacy and education, the sus­ www.MyMoney.gov and a toll-free
tainability of community development number (1-888-my-money [1-888-696­
organizations, emerging and immigrant 6639]) were launched to provide con­
markets, and community economic sumers with easy access to information
development. Activities included con­ resources. The national strategy work­
ducting research, publishing newsletters ing group will continue its work, incor­
and articles, sponsoring conferences porating public remarks submitted in
and seminars, and providing advisory response to a request for comment and
services, all of which helped to deliver finalizing the national strategy in a
pertinent information to both general report to Congress due in June 2005.
and targeted audiences. Consistent with the national goal to
As a decentralized function, the com­ increase financial literacy among con­
munity affairs programs at the Board sumers, community affairs staff assisted
and each of the twelve Reserve Banks in the planning and delivery of financial
design activities that are responsive to and consumer education programs to
the communities in the regions they Board employees. Four programs were
serve. At the Reserve Banks, Commu­ offered in 2004, and a web site for
nity Affairs Offices focus on providing online personal finance education was
information and promoting awareness established for Board employees.
of investment opportunities to finan­ Board staff use surveys and focus
cial institutions, government agencies, groups to learn about what issues are
and organizations that serve low- and important to consumers and to test and
moderate-income communities and develop educational materials. Last year
populations, while the Board’s Commu­ Board staff updated the ‘‘Consumer’s
nity Affairs Office engages in activities Guide to Mortgage Settlement Costs’’
that have implications for public policy. and the ‘‘Choosing a Credit Card’’
In 2004, Board staff actively partici­ brochures and issued two new publica­
pated in interagency working groups tions dealing with checks and the new
created to fulfill the legislative man­ Check 21 provisions: the ‘‘Consumer
dates of the U.S. Department of the Guide to Check 21 and Substitute
Treasury’s Financial Literacy and Edu­ Checks’’ and ‘‘What You Should Know
cation Commission (the commission), about Your Checks.’’ The Board, in
established under the Fair and Accurate cooperation with the other federal bank,
Credit Transactions Act (the FACT Act). thrift, and credit union regulators, pro­
The commission consists of the chiefs duced materials on ‘‘phishing,’’ ‘‘Inter­
of twenty federal agencies; Governor net Pirates Are Trying to Steal Your
Edward Gramlich represents Chairman Personal Financial Information,’’ and on
Alan Greenspan as the Board’s member. bounced-check fees, ‘‘Protecting Your­
Board staff participated on two of the self from Overdraft and Bounced-Check
commission’s working groups: one to Fees.’’ These publications are avail­
help design and launch a web site to link able on the Board’s consumer informa­
consumers with financial education tion web site (www.federalreserve.gov/
resources available from federal gov­ consumers.htm).
ernment agencies, and one to frame Board staff are involved in ongoing
a national strategy for the federal research projects related to financial

Consumer and Community Affairs 79
privacy disclosures, consumers’ use of program in Providence, Rhode Island,
electronic banking services and stored- offers programs to teach seniors about
value cards, remittances and immi­ credit card use, predatory lending, and
grants’ use of financial services (see the financial planning. By serving as advis­
related box ‘‘Remittances and Immi­ ers to the mayors in the nearly thirty-
grant Markets: Opportunities and five cities involved in the campaign, the
Challenges’’), and the role of financial Federal Reserve Banks are helping to
education in community development. increase the public’s awareness of and
Board staff are also working with the access to resources for financial liter­
Department of Defense on a longi­ acy and education. In addition, Federal
tudinal study on the effects of finan­ Reserve System community affairs staff
cial education conducted on military continued to work closely with national
installations. leaders from the Native American com­
Board staff assisted with national munity to develop a financial educa­
financial education initiatives through­ tion policy and other resources that are
out the year. The director of the Divi­ responsive to the unique needs of resi­
sion of Consumer and Community dents in Indian Country. Board staff
Affairs served as an adviser to the board hosted a meeting of the Native Ameri­
of Operation HOPE, a national non­ can Financial Education Task Force in
profit organization dedicated to deliver­ December. The meeting provided an
ing financial education programs to low- opportunity for the five committees
income populations through schools and of the task force to focus on the finan­
community centers, as well as to com­ cial education needs of Native Ameri­
munities suffering from natural disas­ cans and on how to deliver education
ters. In addition, staff participated in resources to these communities.
two national forums: one sponsored by The Community Affairs Offices at
the National Endowment for Financial the Reserve Banks continued their
Education to explore strategies for pro­ financial education initiatives. The Fed­
moting positive financial management eral Reserve Bank of Cleveland worked
behaviors, and another convened by the with bank and community partners in
Government Accountability Office (for­ Cleveland, Pittsburgh, and Cincinnati
merly the General Accounting Office) to to form regional collaborations to
define the federal government’s role in develop and deliver financial education
personal financial education. resources. The Federal Reserve Bank of
System financial education projects Minneapolis was instrumental in form­
supplemented the Board’s efforts. The ing the Montana Financial Education
community affairs and public informa­ Coalition. The Federal Reserve Bank
tion officers at the Reserve Banks col­ of Boston partnered with a community
laborated with the U.S. Conference of group to provide train-the-trainer work­
Mayors to explore strategies for estab­ shops to social service workers, hosted
lishing financial education initiatives in a conference on best practices, and
cities throughout the country. The result­ worked with Operation HOPE to launch
ing ‘‘Dollar Wi$e’’ initiative enables a financial literacy campaign in the
cities to create programs that meet the schools in Providence, Rhode Island.
needs of their citizens. For example, the In addition, the Federal Reserve Bank
campaign in Detroit, Michigan, focuses of Kansas City sponsored a number of
on providing financial education train­ financial education events that spe­
ing to community educators, while the cifically targeted youth, Native Ameri­

80 91st Annual Report, 2004
Remittances and Immigrant Markets:
Opportunities and Challenges
The provision of remittance services is a potentially effective method by which
mainstream financial institutions can attract unbanked immigrants.
Ben S. Bernanke, Member, Board of Governors
April 16, 2004
Immigrant workers typically send a large service fees as high as 15 percent of the
portion of their earnings back to their home transfer, thus eroding the amount of money
countries. The United States is the largest an immigrant’s family receives. Many fac­
source country for these cross-border funds tors influence the fees charged, including
transfers, known as remittances: About the service provider’s operating costs and
$32 billion was remitted in 2003, accord­ geographic coverage.
ing to a recent report from the Inter- To facilitate cost-effective funds trans­
American Dialogue. (As used in this fers to Canada, Mexico, and five trans­
article, the term remittances refers specifi­ atlantic countries, the Reserve Banks offer
cally to the international transfer of funds FedACH International products to banks.
between individuals.) Because they are These products allow banks to send inter­
such a significant flow of funds, remit­ national credit transactions electronically
tances have attracted the attention of law­ via the same process used to send domestic
makers, bankers, consumer and community transactions. Intended primarily for inter­
groups, and domestic and international national corporate payments, the products
banking agencies. provide a potentially less costly way for
The Inter-American Development consumers to remit funds. In 2004, the
Bank’s Multilateral Investment Fund service was expanded to include Mexico.
reports that the highest volume of remit­ The Reserve Banks worked cooperatively
tance traffic—an estimated 100 million with the Central Bank of Mexico to make it
transactions each year—occurs between the easier for Mexican retail banking systems
United States and Latin America. Billions to support remittances—an effort that may
in Motion, a 2002 report published by the also encourage consumers in the United
Pew Hispanic Center, described a typical States and Mexico to develop banking
remitter in the United States as a thirty- relationships.
seven-year-old, lower-skilled immigrant Along with the other Federal Financial
from Mexico or another Latin American Institutions Examination Council agencies,
country who earns less than $30,000 annu­ the Federal Reserve Board examined the
ally, has not completed high school, does role of the Community Reinvestment Act
not have a credit card, does not own his or in encouraging banks to provide financial
her home, and is among the 43 percent of services to immigrants—who are typically
Latino immigrants who do not have a bank a low-income, underserved population. As
account. a result of policy guidance issued in June
The process of remitting funds has 2004, banks that offer remittance services
changed significantly since 1990, when may receive CRA credit if these services
many immigrants used informal networks, are affordable and meet the needs of the
such as friends and family, to transfer lower-income remitters in their markets.
funds. Today, money-transfer organizations For banks, immigrants and remittances
are the dominant providers of remittance present a market opportunity. The Remit­
services. But these firms typically charge tance Marketplace, a 2004 report from the

Consumer and Community Affairs 81
Pew Hispanic Center, found that only about Conference participants shared insights
3 percent of remittance transactions to on essential policies and practices.
Mexico were conducted through banks. • The Federal Reserve Bank of Boston’s
Despite recent efforts by banks and credit Community Affairs Office conducted
unions to increase account ownership in-depth market research on immigrant
among Hispanic markets, the report also communities in the First District. The
found that 8 million Latinos remain office’s other financial education initia­
‘‘unbanked.’’ tives targeted Hispanic communities in
Banks, however, need to understand the Boston, Massachusetts, and Providence,
many issues involved in serving immi­ Rhode Island.
grants. For example, many immigrants are
As the U.S. population becomes more
uncomfortable using banks and do not
diverse, the Federal Reserve System will
understand how banks charge for their ser­
continue to work with policymakers, com­
vices. In 2004, the Federal Reserve System
munity groups, and bankers to ensure that
undertook several initiatives to share infor­
immigrants have fair and equal access to
mation on reaching immigrant markets.
the U.S. financial system. The following
Reserve Bank publications provide more
• The Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
information on remittances and immigrant
launched the Center for the Study of
banking.
Financial Access for Immigrants, which
hosted a national conference, ‘‘Financial • ‘‘Financial Access for Immigrants
Access for Immigrants: Learning from Conference: Learning from Diverse
Diverse Perspectives,’’ in collaboration Perspectives,’’ Profitwise News and
with the Brookings Institution. In addi­ Views, Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago,
tion, the Chicago Reserve Bank’s Com­ October 2004, www.chicagofed.org/
munity Affairs Office convened several community_development/
forums throughout the Seventh District • ‘‘Meeting in the Mainstream,’’ Banking
to gain insight into the social, economic, and Community Perspectives, Federal
and other issues that inhibit immigrants Reserve Bank of Dallas, issue 1, 2004,
from using banks. www.dallasfed.org/ca/index.html
• The Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta • ‘‘FedACH International Services Opens
hosted ‘‘Payments in the Americas,’’ a Payments Channel to Mexico,’’ Part­
conference that explored the policy and ners in Community and Economic Devel­
regulatory challenges of providing remit­ opment, Federal Reserve Bank of
tance services. Staff from the Board and Atlanta, volume 14, number 1, 2004,
the Atlanta Reserve Bank are also spon­ www.atl.frb.org/comm.cfm
soring focus groups with Mexican immi­ • ‘‘Banking Unbanked Immigrants through
grants to learn about the factors influ­ Remittances,’’ Communities and Bank­
encing their banking and remitting ing, Federal Reserve Bank of Boston,
behaviors. Fall 2003, www.bos.frb.org/commdev/
• Federal Reserve Board staff participated index.htm
on a remittances panel at the 2004 • Community Investments Online, Federal
conference of the American Council of Reserve Bank of San Francisco, Novem­
Consumer Interests. The panel addressed ber 2003, www.sf.frb.org/community/
consumer information, disclosure, and index.html
protection issues. • ‘‘Banking Latino Immigrants: A Lucra­
• The Community Affairs Office of the tive New Market for Progressive
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas hosted Financial Institutions,’’ Bridges, Federal
‘‘The Business of Immigrant Markets: Reserve Bank of St. Louis, Autumn
Providing Access to Financial Services.’’ 2002, www.stlouisfed.org/community/

82 91st Annual Report, 2004
can, and Hispanic populations. The Development Investments; the Bank’s
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, staff worked closely with an advisory
Chicago, and Philadelphia hosted board of industry experts to develop a
events on wealth-building and asset- web site of resources, training, and tech­
accumulation strategies and initiatives nical assistance on community develop­
throughout their Districts. An article ment investments. The System’s Com­
highlighting the various financial educa­ munity Affairs Offices also continued to
tion efforts of the Federal Reserve Sys­ work with the Wall Street Without Walls
tem was published in the Autumn 2004 initiative to help community develop­
edition of the Federal Reserve Bulletin ment organizations increase their access
(www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/ to the capital markets for funding. The
default.htm). Federal Reserve Banks of Chicago,
In recent years, reduced funding and San Francisco, and New York hosted
changing priorities among government training events that attracted nearly 370
and philanthropic organizations have community development leaders inter­
diminished access to resources for many ested in understanding the requirements
community development organizations. of the capital markets. In addition, the
As it did in 2003, the Board’s Com­ Community Affairs Office of the Boston
munity Affairs Office convened meet­ Reserve Bank collaborated with Wall
ings of federal government officials Street Without Walls and Southern New
and national community development Hampshire University to sponsor the
leaders to explore the sustainability and inaugural session of the ‘‘Capital Mar­
capitalization of community economic kets Training Institute’’ in Manchester,
development finance (CEDF) orga­ New Hampshire. Participants at this
nizations. The Board’s Community three-day event learned how they can
Affairs Office convened a policy forum use the capital markets to fulfill their
in April with the Aspen Institute, organizations’ missions more efficiently
a national research and leadership and learned how to adapt their opera­
development organization. The forum tions to allow their organizations to
discussed Aspen’s research on the access the capital markets. Demonstrat­
attributes of industries, organizations, ing the ongoing commitment of the
and products that achieve scale and System’s Community Affairs Offices,
become self-sustaining. The research the director of the Board’s Division
compared and contrasted the funding of Consumer and Community Affairs
and business strategies of sustainable began serving on the Walls Street With­
enterprises with those of CEDF insti­ out Walls advisory board in 2004.
tutions, identifying areas where the field Reserve Bank efforts also explored
needs to focus efforts to increase its ways to increase the effectiveness of
future viability. The forum assembled community development finances in
leaders from financial institutions, their Districts. The Federal Reserve
government agencies, foundations, and Bank of Dallas sponsored ‘‘Momentum
membership associations. Texas: The Texas Community Devel­
Reserve Bank Community Affairs opment Finance Summit’’ to examine
Offices explored new sources of capital the state’s strategies for securing and
to increase the sustainability of CEDF using community economic develop­
organizations. The Federal Reserve ment funds. The Cleveland Reserve
Bank of San Francisco expanded the Bank organized a policy summit,
scope of its Center for Community ‘‘Recapitalization of Communities,’’ in

Consumer and Community Affairs 83
which regional and national community Rodham Clinton was the keynote
development leaders discussed chal­ speaker.
lenges to and opportunities for attracting The Board’s Community Affairs
new capital to fund CEDF institutions’ Office continued to improve and support
initiatives for infrastructure develop­ its Fiscal Impact Tool (FIT), a web-
ment, wealth-building, and other asset- based modeling tool designed to support
accumulation programs. the evaluation of prospective commu­
The System’s Community Affairs nity and economic development projects
Offices remain committed to increasing in midsize communities. This analytic
the role of research in their work. Prepa­ tool enables community economic
rations have begun for the biennial com­ developers to conduct a cost–benefit
munity affairs research conference in analysis of a proposed development
April 2005; Chairman Greenspan will project by estimating its effect on
be a keynote speaker at the two-day local sales and property tax reve­
event. System community affairs staff nues and on costs to local government.
collaborated with their research col­ Available at no cost on the Board’s
leagues at the Board and the Cleveland web site (www.federalreserve.gov/forms/
Reserve Bank to identify and review fiscalimpactrequest.cfm), FIT can aid
papers that would best address the con­ decisionmakers in determining the eco­
ference’s theme, ‘‘Promises and Pitfalls: nomic value of a proposed activity for
As Consumer Finance Options Multiply, their community.
Who Is Being Served and at What The Board’s Community Affairs
Cost?’’ Studies chosen will assess the Office, in partnership with the Chi­
impact that consumer behavior, alterna­ cago, Kansas City, Philadelphia,
tive financial services providers, finan­ Richmond, and St. Louis Reserve
cial education, and other factors have on Banks, continued to develop best-
consumers’ access to and experiences practice case studies for the web-based
with the financial sector. database Lessons Learned: Community
The New York, Philadelphia, and and Economic Development Case
Cleveland Reserve Banks collaborated Studies (www.chicagofed.org/cedric/
to host a community development lesle_index.cfm). The database provides
finance research conference in Decem­ detailed case studies that identify a
ber. The conference commissioned community development issue, present
papers from leading researchers on a one community’s solution, describe the
broad range of topics, including strate­ results, and offer ‘‘lessons learned’’ to
gies for asset creation among lower- community developers addressing simi­
income populations, the role of micro- lar concerns in their communities. The
lending in community development, database can be accessed on the Sys­
methods for measuring the impact of tem’s research repository web site, the
community development, and the rela­ Community and Economic Develop­
tionship between subprime markets and ment Research Information Center
predatory lending. In addition, scholars (CEDRIC).
and practitioners explored the roles of
alternative depository institutions and
Outreach Activities
public policy in helping traditionally
underserved populations and communi­ The Board engages in outreach activi­
ties access capital for asset accumula­ ties throughout the year to provide infor­
tion and development. Senator Hillary mation to the public about the Board’s

84 91st Annual Report, 2004
responsibilities, to facilitate understand­ the Board again participated in the
ing of changes in banking regulations Congressional Black Caucus Founda­
and their impact on banks and consum­ tion’s 2004 annual legislative confer­
ers, to promote community development ence, which provides a national forum
and consumer education, and to foster for examining strategies and viable solu­
discussion of public policy issues. Board tions to public policy issues facing Afri­
staff periodically meet with financial can Americans. Board staff distributed
institutions, community groups, and consumer education materials provided
other members of the public in formal by the Federal Reserve System and used
and informal settings. The Board spon­ the opportunity to inform conference
sors and participates in meetings, con­ attendees about the Federal Reserve and
ferences, and seminars for the general its multifaceted responsibilities.
public and targeted audiences. This year,

85
Banking Supervision and Regulation
Earnings of insured commercial banks slightly, to 1.35 percent, the third
exceeded the $100 billion mark for the consecutive year in which this ratio
second consecutive year in 2004 amid exceeded 1.30 percent.
significant changes in the interest rate Loans grew a remarkable 11.0 per­
environment, an end to the boom period cent, or $480 billion, in 2004, with most
in mortgage refinancings, and several growth occurring in commercial real
mergers among large bank holding estate ($131 billion), home equity
companies. ($114 billion), residential mortgages
At $106.7 billion, profits rose 6.4 per­ ($89 billion), and credit card loans
cent from 2003, fueled by growth in ($61 billion). The growth of commercial
loans (11.0 percent overall) and invest­ real estate lending was even more rapid
ment securities (6.4 percent) and by a than in the past few years, with con­
decline in provisions for loan loss struction lending up 25.2 percent and
(22.3 percent). The net interest margin loans secured by nonfarm nonresidential
on all earning assets fell 7 basis points, properties up 10.7 percent. Home equity
to 3.72 percent, low by historical stan­ loans grew an extraordinary 40.2 per­
dards. Non-interest income grew mod­ cent, the fifth consecutive year in which
estly overall (3.9 percent) despite lower their growth exceeded 20 percent. The
revenues from mortgage originations growth of residential mortgages came
and soft trading income. Servicing mostly in the first half of the year and
income, income from fiduciary activi­ slowed considerably once short-term
ties, and deposit fees accounted for most market interest rates began to rise in
of the growth. Expenses rose sharply June. Some of the increase in credit card
(9.4 percent), significantly influenced by lending was technical in nature, related
nonrecurring items related to mergers to the reclassification of balances from
and the creation of litigation reserves at credit-card-related securities to loans as
a few large institutions. accounting treatments were harmonized
Return on total shareholders’ equity at newly merged large banks. Commer­
fell a full percentage point, to a still- cial and industrial (C&I) loans rose
strong 14.27 percent. The decline in $37 billion, or 4.3 percent, for the year
this profitability ratio was due primarily despite having declined modestly in the
to significant merger-related increases first quarter amid weak loan demand.
in equity that were largely offset by Holdings of investment securities
increases in merger-related intangible grew less rapidly than loans, expanding
assets.1 Return on assets fell only 6.4 percent overall (or $93 billion) for
the full year while experiencing substan­
tial shifts as the year progressed in
1. The number and size of bank-related merger response to changing market conditions.
transactions significantly affected the aggregation Essentially all the net growth for the
of commercial bank reports of income and con­ year could be attributed to mortgage
dition (Call Reports) in 2004. The data used in
this discussion have been adjusted to address the
effects of purchase accounting and, in particular, large holding companies acquired by other bank
push-down accounting for bank subsidiaries of holding companies.

86 91st Annual Report, 2004
pass-through securities acquired during significantly ($10.5 billion, or 1.6 per­
the first quarter. Reacting to changes in cent); the bulk of the increase came
the interest rate environment, banks sold in the final quarter of the year as con­
off $36 billion (or 5.9 percent) of their sumers sought to take advantage of
mortgage pass-through securities hold­ rising interest rates. Time deposits
ings in the second and third quarters over $100,000 rose $128.3 billion, or
and then purchased roughly the same 21.5 percent, and foreign deposits grew
amount during the fourth quarter as $125 billion, or 16.8 percent; these
longer-term interest rates stabilized. categories include large-denomination
Banks also sold off a modest proportion deposits raised in wholesale and off­
of their structured mortgage securities shore money markets, which, along with
(for example, collateralized mortgage a modest rise in short-term non-deposit
obligations) and asset-backed securities borrowings (4.6 percent), accommo­
in the third quarter and then acquired dated the growth in assets.
additional foreign-issued debt securities Influenced by both balance sheet
during the fourth quarter. These reposi­ changes and movements in market inter­
tioning transactions came in response est rates, net interest margins narrowed
to actual and anticipated movements 7 basis points, to 3.72 percent. Yields on
in market interest rates (together with domestic real estate loans—including
unexpected stability in long-term rates, commercial real estate and home equity
leading to a flatter yield curve) and the loans—fell 25 basis points despite
associated volatility in the carrying higher short-term interest rates. Over­
value of mortgage-servicing assets. all yields on securities holdings rose
Supporting this robust asset growth, modestly—in part because of rising
core deposits continued their recent short-term interest rates—while yields
strong expansion. Money market deposit on C&I loans held steady at 6.00 per­
account (MMDA) deposits and sav­ cent amid reports that bankers were eas­
ings deposits grew $270 billion, or ing their lending standards through the
11.7 percent, slightly exceeding the year. Changes in the effective rates for
remarkable growth rate for loans. Note­ credit cards and other consumer loans
worthy increases were evident among were mixed. Funding costs reflected
other core deposit categories, including some resistance to higher interest rates,
other transaction accounts (up $6.1 bil­ as the effective cost of MMDA and
lion) and demand deposits (up $24.5 bil­ savings deposits remained essentially
lion). The increase in demand deposits unchanged from 2003, at 0.73 percent,
was influenced by an inflow of balances while the effective cost of other deposits
from corporate customers in the latter and borrowings declined 20–30 basis
half of the year as short-term market points.
interest rates rose, boosting earnings Equity-to-assets ratios rose a full per­
credits on compensating balances.2 centage point in 2004, primarily as a
Time deposits under $100,000 grew less result of the merger-related increases
in shareholders’ equity noted earlier.
2. Although banks are prohibited from paying Regulatory capital ratios, in contrast,
interest on transaction accounts held by commer­ remained relatively steady, as the
cial customers, these customers in many cases merger-related increase in equity was
receive ‘‘earnings credits’’ on their transaction
balances that may be used to offset service charges
they incur. The amounts of such earnings credits the size of collected balances and prevailing short-
are determined by a number of factors, including term market interest rates.

Banking Supervision and Regulation 87
largely offset by goodwill-related intan­ Scope of Responsibilities for
gible assets, which are deducted from Supervision and Regulation
regulatory capital measures. Dividends
The Federal Reserve is the federal
paid by commercial banks fell sharply,
supervisor and regulator of all U.S. bank
declining $18 billion, or 23.4 percent.
holding companies, including financial
Most of the decline (61 percent) came in
holding companies formed under the
dividends paid to the five largest bank
authority of the 1999 Gramm–Leach–
holding companies (Citigroup, JPMor­
Bliley Act, and of state-chartered com­
gan Chase, Bank of America, Wachovia
mercial banks that are members of the
and Wells Fargo, all on a merger-
Federal Reserve System. In overseeing
adjusted basis) by their commercial
these organizations, the Federal Reserve
bank subsidiaries; dividend payments
seeks primarily to promote their safe
from the holding companies to their
and sound operation, including their
shareholders rose.
compliance with laws and regulations.3
Already-strong asset quality im­
The Federal Reserve also has respon­
proved further in 2004 according to all
sibility for the supervision of all Edge
conventional measures. Nonperforming
Act and agreement corporations; the
assets fell to 0.62 percent of loans and
international operations of state member
related assets, well below both the
banks and U.S. bank holding companies;
0.94 percent rate for 2003 and the pre­
and the operations of foreign banking
vious credit-cycle low point in 1997–99
companies in the United States.
(0.75 percent). Net charge-offs fell to
The Federal Reserve exercises impor­
0.63 percent of loans, from 0.88 per­
tant regulatory influence over entry into
cent in 2003, roughly in line with the
the U.S. banking system and the struc­
1997–99 period. Reserves fell in abso­
ture of the system through its adminis­
lute terms (4.2 percent), but reserve
tration of the Bank Holding Company
coverage of nonperforming assets still
Act, the Bank Merger Act (with regard
improved substantially.
to state member banks), the Change in
Reflecting ongoing consolidation in
Bank Control Act (with regard to bank
the industry, the number of insured com­
holding companies and state member
mercial banks declined by 142 (on a net
banks), and the International Banking
basis), to 7,621. Still, some 122 new
Act. The Federal Reserve is also respon­
charters were granted in 2004 (105 of
sible for imposing margin requirements
these by state authorities), a sign of the
on securities transactions. In carrying
continuing attractiveness of commercial
out these responsibilities, the Federal
bank charters. Assuming a minimum
Reserve coordinates its supervisory
initial capitalization of $8 million, these
newly chartered institutions attracted
nearly $1 billion of new capital into the 3. The Board’s Division of Consumer and
banking industry. Community Affairs coordinates the Federal
Consistent with the industry’s strong Reserve’s supervisory activities with regard to
compliance with consumer protection and civil
earnings and balance sheets, only three
rights laws. Those activities are described in
banks failed in 2004 (combined assets the chapter ‘‘Consumer and Community Affairs.’’
of roughly $200 million), one more than Compliance with other banking laws and regu­
in 2003. The number of problem banks lations, which is treated in this chapter, is the
responsibility of the Board’s Division of Bank­
(that is, those receiving a supervisory
ing Supervision and Regulation and the Federal
rating of 4 or 5 on overall condition)
Reserve Banks, whose examiners also check for
declined by 28, to 90 institutions. safety and soundness.

88 91st Annual Report, 2004
activities with other federal banking State Member Banks
agencies, state agencies, functional
At the end of 2004, 919 state-chartered
regulators, and the bank regulatory
banks (excluding nondepository trust
agencies of other nations.
companies and private banks) were
members of the Federal Reserve Sys­
tem. These banks represented approxi­
Supervision for
mately 12 percent of all insured U.S.
Safety and Soundness
commercial banks and held approxi­
To ensure the safety and soundness of mately 15 percent of all insured com­
banking organizations, the Federal mercial bank assets in the United States.
Reserve conducts on-site examinations The guidelines for Federal Reserve
and inspections and off-site surveillance examinations of state member banks
and monitoring. It also undertakes are fully consistent with section 10 of
enforcement and other supervisory the Federal Deposit Insurance Act, as
actions. amended by section 111 of the Federal
Deposit Insurance Corporation Improve­
ment Act of 1991 and by the Riegle
Examinations and Inspections Community Development and Regula­
tory Improvement Act of 1994. A full-
The Federal Reserve conducts examina­
scope, on-site examination of these
tions of state member banks, the U.S.
banks is required at least once a year;
branches and agencies of foreign banks,
exceptions are certain well-capitalized,
and Edge Act and agreement corpora­
well-managed organizations having
tions. In a process distinct from exami­
assets of less than $250 million, which
nations, it conducts inspections of bank
may be examined once every eighteen
holding companies and their nonbank
months.
subsidiaries. Pre-examination planning
and on-site review of operations are
integral parts of the overall effort to
Bank Holding Companies
ensure the safety and soundness of
banking organizations. Whether it is an At year-end 2004, a total of 5,863 U.S.
examination or an inspection, the review bank holding companies were in opera­
entails (1) an assessment of the quality tion, of which 5,151 were top-tier bank
of the processes in place to identify, holding companies. These organizations
measure, monitor, and control risks, controlled 6,235 insured commercial
(2) an assessment of the quality of the banks and held approximately 96 per­
organization’s assets, (3) an evaluation cent of all insured commercial bank
of management, including an assess­ assets in the United States.
ment of internal policies, procedures, Federal Reserve guidelines call for
controls, and operations, (4) an assess­ annual inspections of large bank holding
ment of the key financial factors of capi­ companies as well as smaller companies
tal, earnings, liquidity, and sensitivity to that have significant nonbank assets. In
market risk, and (5) a review for compli­ judging the financial condition of the
ance with applicable laws and regula­ subsidiary banks owned by holding
tions. The table provides information companies, Federal Reserve examiners
on the examinations and inspections consult examination reports prepared
conducted by the Federal Reserve dur­ by the federal and state banking authori­
ing the past five years. ties that have primary responsibility for

Banking Supervision and Regulation 89
State Member Banks and Holding Companies, 2000–2004
Entity/Item 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000
State member banks
Total number .......................... 919 935 949 970 991
Total assets (billions of dollars) ......... 1,275 1,912 1,863 1,823 1,645
Number of examinations ............... 809 822 814 816 899
By Federal Reserve System .......... 581 581 550 561 610
By state banking agency ............. 228 241 264 255 289
Top-tier bank holding companies
Large (assets of more than $1 billion)
Total number ........................ 355 365 329 312 309
Total assets (billions of dollars) ....... 8,429 8,295 7,483 6,905 6,213
Number of inspections ............... 500 454 439 413 352
By Federal Reserve System1 ....... 491 446 431 409 346
On site ......................... 440 399 385 372 309
Off site ......................... 51 47 46 37 37
By state banking agency ........... 9 8 8 4 6
Small (assets of $1 billion or less)
Total number ........................ 4,796 4,787 4,806 4,816 4,800
Total assets (billions of dollars) ....... 852 847 821 768 716
Number of inspections ............... 3,703 3,453 3,726 3,486 3,347
By Federal Reserve System ........ 3,526 3,324 3,625 3,396 3,264
On site 2 ........................ 186 183 264 730 835
Off site ......................... 3,340 3,141 3,361 2,666 2,429
By state banking agency ........... 177 129 101 90 83
Financial holding companies
Domestic .............................. 600 612 602 567 462
Foreign ............................... 36 32 30 23 21
1. For large bank holding companies subject to con­ inspections being performed off site versus on site.
tinuous, risk-focused supervision, includes multiple tar­ See text section ‘‘Bank Holding Companies’’ for more
geted reviews. information.
2. In 2002, the supervisory program for small bank
holding companies was revised, resulting in more
the supervision of those banks, thereby rial outstanding issues at the holding
minimizing duplication of effort and company or consolidated level are other­
reducing the burden on banking wise indicated, only a composite rating
organizations. and a management rating based on the
Small, noncomplex bank holding ratings of the lead subsidiary depository
companies—those that have consoli­ institution are assigned to the company.
dated assets of $1 billion or less—are In 2004 the Federal Reserve conducted
subject to a special supervisory program 3,703 reviews of such bank holding
that was implemented in 1997 and companies. If a company’s subsidiary
modified in 2002.4 The program permits depository institutions have ratings
a more flexible approach to supervision lower than ‘‘satisfactory’’ or have other
of such companies. If all of a company’s significant supervisory issues, a more
subsidiary depository institutions have thorough off-site review of the organiza­
composite and management ratings of tion is conducted using surveillance
‘‘satisfactory’’ or better, and if no mate­ results and other information. If the
information obtained off-site from these
4. Refer to SR Letter 02–01 for a discussion sources is not sufficient to determine the
of the factors considered in determining whether a
overall financial condition of the hold­
bank holding company is complex or noncomplex
ing company and to assign the compos­
(www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/SRLETTERS/
2002/sr0201.htm). ite and management ratings, the holding

90 91st Annual Report, 2004
company is subject to increased supervi­ The BSA and separate Board regu­
sory review that may include an on-site lations require banking organizations
review and off-site monitoring. supervised by the Board to file reports
on suspicious activity related to possible
Financial Holding Companies violations of federal law, including
money laundering, terrorist financing,
Under the Gramm–Leach–Bliley Act,
and other financial crimes. In addition,
bank holding companies that meet cer­
BSA and Board regulations require that
tain capital, managerial, and other re­
banks develop written programs on BSA
quirements may elect to become finan­
compliance and that the programs be
cial holding companies and thereby
formally approved by bank boards of
engage in full-scope securities under­
directors. An institution’s compliance
writing, merchant banking, and insur­
program must (1) establish a system of
ance underwriting and sales activities.
internal controls to ensure compliance
The statute streamlines the Federal
with the BSA, (2) provide for inde­
Reserve’s supervision of all bank hold­
pendent compliance testing, (3) identify
ing companies, including financial hold­
individuals responsible for coordinating
ing companies, and sets forth param­
and monitoring day-to-day compliance,
eters for the relationship between the
and (4) provide training for personnel as
Federal Reserve and other regulators.
appropriate.
The statute also differentiates between
The Federal Reserve is responsible
the Federal Reserve’s relations with
for examining supervised institutions for
regulators of depository institutions and
compliance with various anti-money­
its relations with functional regulators
laundering regulations. During examina­
(that is, regulators for insurance, securi­
tions of state member banks and U.S.
ties, and commodities).
branches and agencies of foreign banks
As of year-end 2004, 600 domestic
and, when appropriate, inspections of
bank holding companies and 36 foreign
bank holding companies, examiners
banking organizations had financial
review the institution’s compliance with
holding company status. Of the domes­
the BSA and determine whether ade­
tic financial holding companies, 34 had
quate procedures and controls to guard
consolidated assets of $15 billion or
against money laundering are in place.
more; 110, between $1 billion and
The Anti-Money-Laundering Policy
$15 billion; 82, between $500 million
and Compliance Section of the Board’s
and $1 billion; and 374, less than
Division of Banking Supervision and
$500 million.
Regulation is responsible for BSA/anti­
money-laundering matters. The section
develops BSA polices and examination
Anti-Money-Laundering
guidance and oversees the Federal
Examinations
Reserve Banks’ implementation of this
The U.S. Department of the Treasury guidance.
regulations (31 CFR 103) implement­
ing the Bank Secrecy Act (BSA) gen­
Business Continuity
erally require banks and other types
of financial institutions to file certain In 2004 the Federal Reserve continued
reports and maintain certain records that its efforts to strengthen the resilience of
are useful in criminal or regulatory the U.S. financial system in the event
proceedings. of unexpected disruptions. Throughout

Banking Supervision and Regulation 91
the year, the Federal Reserve monitored ness examinations are now expected to
financial institutions’ progress toward include a review of information technol­
implementing the sound practices iden­ ogy risks and activities. During 2004 the
tified in the April 2003 ‘‘Interagency Federal Reserve was the lead agency in
Paper on Sound Practices to Strengthen two examinations of large, multiregional
the Resilience of the U.S. Financial data processing servicers examined in
System,’’ a joint publication with the cooperation with the other federal bank­
Office of the Comptroller of the Cur­ ing agencies.
rency (OCC) and the Securities and
Exchange Commission (SEC), which
Fiduciary Activities
specifies 2005–06 implementation dates.
The agencies also began analyzing the The Federal Reserve has supervisory
risks associated with business continuity responsibility for organizations that
testing, in order to develop examiner together hold more than $24 trillion of
guidance, and continue to coordinate assets in various fiduciary capacities,
efforts to ensure a consistent supervi­ including custodial capacities. During
sory approach toward implementation of on-site examinations of fiduciary activi­
the sound practices. ties, the organization’s compliance with
laws, regulations, and general fiduciary
principles and potential conflicts of
Specialized Examinations interest are reviewed; its management
and operations, including its asset- and
The Federal Reserve conducts special­
account-management, risk-management,
ized examinations of banking organiza­
and audit and control procedures, are
tions in the areas of information technol­
also evaluated. In 2004 Federal Reserve
ogy, fiduciary activities, transfer agent
examiners conducted 163 on-site fidu­
activities, and government and munici­
ciary examinations.
pal securities dealing and brokering. The
Federal Reserve also conducts special­
ized examinations of certain entities, Transfer Agents and
other than banks, brokers, or dealers, Securities Clearing Agencies
that extend credit subject to the Board’s
As directed by the Securities Exchange
margin regulations.
Act of 1934, the Federal Reserve con­
ducts specialized examinations of those
Information Technology Activities
state member banks and bank holding
In recognition of the importance of companies that are registered with the
information technology to safe and Board as transfer agents. Among other
sound operations in the financial things, transfer agents countersign and
industry, the Federal Reserve reviews monitor the issuance of securities, reg­
the information technology activities ister the transfer of securities, and
of supervised banking organizations as exchange or convert securities. On-site
well as certain independent data centers examinations focus on the effective­
that provide information technology ness of an organization’s operations and
services to these organizations. Several its compliance with relevant securities
years ago, the information technology regulations. During 2004 the Federal
reviews of banking organizations were Reserve conducted on-site examinations
integrated into the overall supervisory at 21 of the 86 state member banks and
process, and thus all safety and sound­ bank holding companies that were reg­

92 91st Annual Report, 2004
istered as transfer agents. Also during for compliance with the Board’s margin
the year the Federal Reserve examined regulations as part of its general exami­
1 state member limited-purpose trust nation program, the Federal Reserve
company acting as a national securities maintains a registry of persons other
depository. than banks, brokers, and dealers who
extend credit subject to those regula­
Government and Municipal Securities tions. The Federal Reserve may conduct
Dealers and Brokers specialized examinations of these lend­
ers if they are not already subject to
The Federal Reserve is responsible for
supervision by the Farm Credit Admin­
examining state member banks and for­
istration, the National Credit Union
eign banks for compliance with the Gov­
Administration, or the Office of Thrift
ernment Securities Act of 1986 and with
Supervision (OTS).
Department of the Treasury regulations
At the end of 2004, 679 lenders other
governing dealing and brokering in
than banks, brokers, or dealers were reg­
government securities. Twenty-eight
istered with the Federal Reserve. Other
state member banks and 7 state branches
federal regulators supervised 215 of
of foreign banks have notified the Board
these lenders, and the remaining 464
that they are government securities deal­
were subject to limited Federal Reserve
ers or brokers not exempt from Trea­
supervision. On the basis of regulatory
sury’s regulations. During 2004 the Fed­
requirements and annual reports, the
eral Reserve conducted 6 examinations
Federal Reserve exempted 245 lenders
of broker–dealer activities in govern­
from its on-site inspection program. The
ment securities at these organizations.
securities credit activities of the remain­
These examinations are generally con­
ing 219 lenders were subject to either
ducted concurrently with the Federal
biennial or triennial inspection. Fifty-
Reserve’s examination of the state mem­
five inspections were conducted during
ber bank or branch.
the year, compared with 89 in 2003.
The Federal Reserve is also respon­
sible for ensuring compliance with the
Securities Act Amendments of 1975 by Enforcement Activities
state member banks and bank holding and Special Investigations
companies that act as municipal securi­
The Federal Reserve has enforcement
ties dealers, which are examined pursu­
authority over the banking organizations
ant to the Municipal Securities Rule-
it supervises and their affiliated parties.
making Board’s rule G-16 at least once
Enforcement action may be taken to
every two calendar years. Of the 22 enti­
address unsafe and unsound practices or
ties that dealt in municipal securities
violations of any law or regulation. For­
during 2004, 6 were examined during
mal enforcement actions include orders
the year.
to cease and desist, written agreements,
removal and prohibition orders, and
Securities Credit Lenders
civil money penalties. Informal enforce­
Under the Securities Exchange Act of ment actions include memorandums of
1934, the Federal Reserve Board is understanding and board of directors
responsible for regulating credit in cer­ resolutions.
tain transactions involving the purchase In 2004 the Federal Reserve com­
or carrying of securities. In addition to pleted 64 formal enforcement actions,
examining banks under its jurisdiction including the issuance of cease-and­

Banking Supervision and Regulation 93
desist orders, written agreements, and Regional Banking Organizations
removal and prohibition orders and the
The risk-focused supervision program
imposition of civil money penalties.
for regional banking organizations
Civil money penalties totaling $188 mil­
applies to organizations having a man­
lion were assessed. All civil money
agement structure organized by func­
penalties, as directed by statute, are
tion or business line, a broad array
remitted either to the Department of the
of products, and operations that span
Treasury or to the Federal Emergency
multiple supervisory jurisdictions. For
Management Agency. Enforcement
smaller regional banking organizations,
orders, which are issued by the Board,
the supervisory program may be imple­
and written agreements, which are
mented with a point-in-time inspection.
executed by the Reserve Banks, are pub­
For larger organizations, it may take the
lic information and are posted on the
form of a series of targeted reviews. For
Board’s web site (www.federalreserve.gov/
the largest, most complex organizations,
boarddocs/enforcement). In addition to
the process is continuous, as described
formal enforcement actions, the Reserve
in the next section. To minimize burden
Banks completed 102 informal enforce­
on the organization, work is performed
ment actions in 2004. Information about
off-site to the greatest extent possible.
these actions is not available to the
Additionally, to minimize the number of
public.
requests for information from organiza­
The Special Investigations Section of
tions, examiners make use of public and
the Division of Banking Supervision and
regulatory financial reports, market data,
Regulation conducts financial investi­
information from automated screening
gations, provides expertise to U.S. law
systems (see the section ‘‘Surveillance
enforcement in connection with finan­
and Off-Site Monitoring’’), and internal
cial crimes investigations, and offers
management reports.
training to foreign and domestic gov­
ernment agencies. Board staff also work
Large, Complex Banking Organizations
with law enforcement, the financial
industry, and other regulatory agencies The Federal Reserve applies a risk-
on various task forces and groups estab­ focused supervision program to large,
lished to combat bank fraud and other complex banking organizations
financial crimes. (LCBOs).5 The key features of the
LCBO supervision program are (1) iden­
tifying those LCBOs that are judged, on
Risk-Focused Supervision
the basis of their shared risk character­
Programs
istics, to present the highest level of
In recent years the Federal Reserve has supervisory risk to the Federal Reserve
created several programs aimed at System, (2) maintaining continual super­
enhancing the effectiveness of the super­ vision of these organizations to keep
visory process. The main objective of current the Federal Reserve’s assess­
these programs has been to sharpen the ment of each organization’s condition,
focus on (1) those business activities
posing the greatest risk to banking orga­
nizations and (2) the organizations’ 5. For more information, see Lisa M. DeFerrari
and David E. Palmer, ‘‘Supervision of Large Com­
management processes for identifying,
plex Banking Organizations,’’ Federal Reserve
measuring, monitoring, and controlling
Bulletin, vol. 87 (February 2001), pp. 47–57
risks. (www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/default.htm).

94 91st Annual Report, 2004
(3) assigning to each LCBO a super­ inspections. This analysis aids in direct­
visory team composed of Reserve Bank ing examination resources to those orga­
staff members who have skills appro­ nizations that exhibit relatively high-
priate for the organization’s risk pro­ risk profiles. Screening systems also
file (the team leader is the central point assist in the planning of examinations
of contact, has responsibility for only by identifying companies that are engag­
one LCBO, and is supported by spe­ ing in new or complex activities. The
cialists skilled in evaluating the risks Federal Reserve also has systems that
of LCBO business activities and func­ monitor market data, including equity
tions), and (4) promoting Systemwide prices, debt spreads, agency ratings, and
and interagency information-sharing measures of expected default frequency,
through automated systems. to gauge market perceptions of the risk
in banking organizations.
Community Banks In addition to using automated screen­
ing systems, the Federal Reserve pre­
The risk-focused supervision program
pares quarterly Bank Holding Company
for community banks emphasizes the
Performance Reports (BHCPRs) for
review of activities posing the greatest
use in monitoring and inspecting super­
risk to an organization and provides for
vised banking organizations. The reports
a tiered approach to the examination of
are compiled from data provided by
those activities. Examination procedures
large bank holding companies in quar­
are tailored to the bank’s characteristics,
terly regulatory reports (FR Y-9C and
keeping in mind its size, complexity,
FR Y-9LP) and contain, for individual
and risk profile. The examination entails
bank holding companies, financial sta­
both off-site and on-site work, including
tistics and comparisons with peer com­
planning, completing a pre-examination
panies. BHCPRs are available to the
visit, preparing a detailed scope-of­
public via the Board’s National Informa­
examination memorandum, document­
tion Center web site (www.ffiec.gov/nic).
ing the work done, and preparing an
During 2004 the web-based Perfor­
examination report tailored to the scope
mance Report Information and Surveil­
and findings of the examination. The
lance Monitoring (PRISM) application
framework for risk-focused supervision
received major upgrades. PRISM is a
of community banks was developed
querying tool used by Federal Reserve
jointly with the Federal Deposit Insur­
analysts to access and display financial,
ance Corporation (FDIC) and has been
surveillance, and examination data. In
adopted by the Conference of State
the analytical module, users can cus­
Bank Supervisors.
tomize the presentation of institutional
financial data drawn from Call Reports,
Uniform Bank Performance Reports,
Surveillance and
FR Y-9 statements, Bank Holding Com­
Off-Site Monitoring
pany Performance Reports, and other
The Federal Reserve uses automated regulatory reports. In the surveillance
screening systems that monitor super­ module, users can generate reports sum­
visory data and regulatory financial marizing the results of surveillance
reports in order to analyze the financial screens for banks and bank holding
condition and performance of state companies. The upgrades established
member banks and bank holding compa­ direct links between PRISM and other
nies between on-site examinations and automated supervisory tools (the Bank­

Banking Supervision and Regulation 95
ing Organization National Desktop, or efforts to implement corrective measures
BOND, and the National Examination or to test their adherence to safe and
Database), expanded the number of sur­ sound banking practices. Examinations
veillance screens available from BOND, abroad are conducted with the coopera­
and enhanced the range of regulatory tion of the supervisory authorities of the
data available for querying. countries in which they take place; when
The Federal Reserve works through appropriate, the examinations are coor­
the Federal Financial Institutions dinated with the OCC.
Examination Council (FFIEC) Task At the end of 2004, 56 member banks
Force on Surveillance Systems to coor­ were operating 763 branches in for­
dinate surveillance activities with the eign countries and overseas areas of the
other federal banking agencies.6 United States; 32 national banks were
operating 706 of these branches, and 24
International Activities state member banks were operating the
remaining 57. In addition, 16 nonmem­
The Federal Reserve supervises the for­ ber banks were operating 17 branches in
eign branches and overseas investments foreign countries and overseas areas of
of member banks, Edge Act and agree­ the United States.
ment corporations, and bank holding
companies and also the investments
by bank holding companies in export Edge Act and Agreement Corporations
trading companies. In addition, it super­ Edge Act corporations are international
vises the activities that foreign banking banking organizations chartered by the
organizations conduct through entities Board to provide all segments of the
in the United States, including branches, U.S. economy with a means of financ­
agencies, representative offices, and ing international business, especially
subsidiaries. exports. Agreement corporations are
similar organizations, state chartered or
Foreign Operations of federally chartered, that enter into an
U.S. Banking Organizations agreement with the Board to refrain
The Federal Reserve examines the from exercising any power that is not
international operations of state mem­ permissible for an Edge Act corporation.
ber banks, Edge Act and agreement cor­ Sections 25 and 25A of the Federal
porations, and bank holding companies Reserve Act grant Edge Act and agree­
generally at the U.S. head offices of ment corporations permission to engage
these organizations, where the ultimate in international banking and foreign
responsibility for their foreign offices financial transactions. These corpora­
lies. Examiners also visit the overseas tions, most of which are subsidiaries
offices of U.S. banks to obtain financial of member banks, may (1) conduct a
and operating information and, in some deposit and loan business in states other
instances, to evaluate the organizations’ than that of the parent, provided that
the business is strictly related to interna­
6. The member agencies of the FFIEC are the tional transactions, and (2) make foreign
Board of Governors, the Federal Deposit Insur­ investments that are broader than those
ance Corporation, the National Credit Union made by member banks, as they may
Administration, the Office of the Comptroller of
invest in foreign financial organizations,
the Currency, and the Office of Thrift Supervision.
such as finance companies and leasing
State supervisory authorities also participate in
some FFIEC initiatives. companies, as well as in foreign banks.

96 91st Annual Report, 2004
At year-end 2004, 79 banking orga­ if the branch or agency meets certain
nizations, operating 9 branches, were criteria.
chartered as Edge Act or agreement cor­ The Federal Reserve conducts a joint
porations. These corporations are exam­ program for supervising the U.S. opera­
ined annually. tions of foreign banking organizations
in cooperation with the other federal
banking agencies and state banking
U.S. Activities of Foreign Banks
agencies. The program has two main
The Federal Reserve has broad authority parts. One part addresses the examina­
to supervise and regulate the U.S. activ­ tion process for those foreign banking
ities of foreign banks that engage in organizations that have multiple U.S.
banking and related activities in the operations and is intended to ensure
United States through branches, agen­ coordination among the various U.S.
cies, representative offices, commercial supervisory agencies. The other part is a
lending companies, Edge Act corpora­ review of the financial and operational
tions, commercial banks, and certain profile of each organization to assess its
nonbank companies. Foreign banks con­ general ability to support its U.S. opera­
tinue to be significant participants in the tions and to determine what risks, if any,
U.S. banking system. the organization poses through its U.S.
As of year-end 2004, 188 foreign operations. Together, these two pro­
banks from 54 countries were operating cesses provide critical information to
228 state-licensed branches and agen­ U.S. supervisors in a logical, uniform,
cies (of which 8 were insured by the and timely manner. The Federal Reserve
FDIC) as well as 51 branches licensed conducted or participated with state
by the OCC (of which 5 had FDIC and federal regulatory authorities in
insurance). These foreign banks also 256 examinations in 2004.
directly owned 14 Edge Act and agree­
ment corporations and 3 commercial
Technical Assistance
lending companies; in addition, they
held an equity interest of at least 25 per­ In 2004 the Federal Reserve System
cent in 88 U.S. commercial banks. continued to provide technical assis­
Altogether, the U.S. offices of these tance on bank supervisory matters to
foreign banks at the end of 2004 con­ foreign central banks and supervi­
trolled approximately 16 percent of U.S. sory authorities. Technical assistance
commercial banking assets. These for­ involves visits by System staff members
eign banks also operated 68 repre­ to foreign authorities as well as con­
sentative offices; an additional 56 for­ sultations with foreign supervisors who
eign banks operated in the United States visit the Board or the Reserve Banks.
solely through a representative office. Technical assistance in 2004 was con­
State-licensed and federally licensed centrated in Latin America, Asia, and
branches and agencies of foreign banks former Soviet bloc countries.
are examined on-site at least once every During the year, the Federal Reserve
eighteen months, either by the Federal offered training courses exclusively for
Reserve or by a state or other federal foreign supervisory authorities in Wash­
regulator; in most cases, on-site exami­ ington, D.C., and in a number of for­
nations are conducted at least once eign jurisdictions. System staff also took
every twelve months, but the period part in technical assistance and training
may be extended to eighteen months missions led by the International Mone­

Banking Supervision and Regulation 97
tary Fund, the World Bank, the Inter- The rule permits banking organizations
American Development Bank, the Asian to continue to exclude from their risk-
Development Bank, the Basel Commit­ weighted asset base, for purposes of cal­
tee on Banking Supervision, and the culating their risk-based capital ratios,
Financial Stability Institute. ABCP program assets that are consoli­
dated onto the balance sheets of spon­
soring banking organizations as a result
Supervisory Policy of Financial Accounting Standards
Board Financial Interpretation No. 46,
The Federal Reserve’s supervisory pol­ ‘‘Consolidation of Variable Interest
icy function is responsible for develop­ Entities’’ (FIN 46). Sponsoring bank­
ing guidance for examiners and banking ing organizations must continue to
organizations as well as regulations for hold risk-based capital against all other
banking organizations under the Federal risk exposures arising in connection
Reserve’s supervision. Staff members with ABCP programs, including direct
participate in international supervisory credit substitutes, recourse obligations,
forums and provide support for the work residual interests, long-term liquidity
of the FFIEC. facilities, and loans, in accordance with
existing risk-based capital standards.
In addition, any minority interests in
Capital Adequacy Standards
ABCP programs that are consolidated
as a result of FIN 46 are to be excluded
During 2004 the Federal Reserve,
from the sponsoring banking organi­
together with the OCC, the FDIC, and
zation’s minority interest component
the OTS (collectively, the federal bank­
of tier 1 capital and, hence, from risk-
ing agencies), issued a final rule on capi­
based capital. The amended capital
tal requirements for asset-backed com­
treatment does not alter the accounting
mercial paper programs. The agencies
rules for balance sheet consolidation,
also continued to consider possible
nor does it affect the denominator of the
revisions to their risk-based capital
tier 1 leverage capital ratio calculation,
adequacy regulations to reflect the new
which continues to be based primarily
Basel II framework and issued proposed
on on-balance-sheet assets as reported
guidance for internal-ratings-based sys­
under generally accepted accounting
tems that may be used to determine
principles. Thus, as a result of FIN 46,
capital for retail credit risk. In addition,
banking organizations must include all
the Federal Reserve requested public
assets of consolidated ABCP programs
comment on a proposed rule concerning
in on-balance-sheet assets for purposes
the treatment of trust preferred securi­
of calculating their tier 1 leverage capi­
ties in the tier 1 capital of bank holding
tal ratio.
companies.
In addition, the rules impose a risk-
based capital charge on liquidity facili­
Asset-Backed
ties having an original maturity of one
Commercial Paper Programs
year or less that organizations provide to
In July the Federal Reserve and the ABCP programs by imposing a 10 per­
other federal banking agencies adopted cent credit conversion factor on such
a final rule that amended the agencies’ facilities. This treatment recognizes that
risk-based capital rules for asset-backed such facilities expose banking organiza­
commercial paper (ABCP) programs. tions to credit risk and is consistent with

98 91st Annual Report, 2004
the industry’s practice of internally allo­ Basel II framework, see the box ‘‘Imple­
cating economic capital against the risk menting the Basel II Framework in the
associated with such facilities. A sepa­ United States.’’)
rate capital charge on liquidity facilities
provided to an ABCP program is not
Capital Treatment of
required of banking organizations that
Trust Preferred Securities
consolidate the program for purposes of
risk-based capital. In May the Federal Reserve Board pro­
posed to allow the continued inclusion
of outstanding and prospective issuances
Risk-Based Capital Standards
of trust preferred securities in the tier 1
for Certain Internationally Active
capital of bank holding companies while
Banking Organizations
imposing stricter quantitative limits and
In August 2003 the Federal Reserve, clarifying qualitative standards for capi­
together with the other federal banking tal instruments included in regulatory
agencies, issued for public comment an capital. The stricter quantitative limits
advance notice of proposed rulemaking would apply to the aggregate amount
and draft supervisory guidance setting of trust preferred securities, cumulative
forth the agencies’ views on implement­ perpetual preferred stock, and minority
ing the Basel II framework in the United interests in the equity accounts of cer­
States. The proposed plan would allow tain consolidated subsidiaries (collec­
banking organizations that meet spe­ tively, restricted core capital elements)
cific criteria to use their own estimates included in bank holding company tier 1
of certain risk parameters as key inputs capital. The proposed rule would make
in determining their regulatory capital explicit a general expectation that inter­
requirements. nationally active bank holding compa­
Over the course of 2004, working nies would limit the amount of restricted
both independently and with the mem­ core capital elements to 15 percent of
ber countries of the Basel Committee on the sum of core capital elements, includ­
Banking Supervision, the federal bank­ ing restricted core capital elements, net
ing agencies continued to modify the of goodwill less any associated deferred
methodologies in the Basel II frame­ tax liability, consistent with a 1998
work. In October the agencies issued Basel agreement. Other bank holding
proposed guidance on internal-ratings­ companies would be subject to a 25 per­
based systems that may be used to deter­ cent limit on the amount of restricted
mine regulatory capital for retail credit core capital elements. The proposal pro­
risk under the Basel II framework. The vides for a three-year transition period
proposed guidance describes the agen­ for compliance with the stricter quantita­
cies’ views on the components and tive limits.
characteristics of a qualifying internal- These revisions were proposed to
ratings-based system for measuring address supervisory concerns, competi­
the credit risk associated with retail tive equity considerations, and changes
exposures, including residential mort­ in generally accepted accounting prin­
gages, consumer credit cards, automo­ ciples. They would have the effect of
bile loans, personal loans, and some strengthening the definition of regula­
small business loans. The comment tory capital for bank holding compa­
period was scheduled to end in January nies. A final rule is to be issued in early
2005. (For more information on the 2005.

Banking Supervision and Regulation 99
Bank-Owned Life Insurance assessment of the subsidiary depository
institution(s), as had been the case for
In December 2004, the Federal Reserve
the bank rating under the previous rat­
and the other federal banking agencies
ing system, BOPEC (Bank subsidiaries,
issued guidance on the safety-and­
Other subsidiaries, Parent, Earnings,
soundness and risk-management impli­
Capital).
cations of purchases and holdings of
To provide a consistent framework
life insurance by banks and savings
for assessing risk management, the risk-
associations. The guidance addresses
management component of the new rat­
the unique characteristics of bank-
ing system is supported by four subcom­
owned life insurance (BOLI) as well as
ponents that reflect the effectiveness of
the need for a comprehensive pre- and
the banking organization’s risk man­
post-purchase analysis of the risks and
agement and controls: board and senior
rewards of BOLI.
management oversight; policies, pro­
cedures, and limits; risk monitoring
and management information systems;
Bank Holding Company
and internal controls. The financial-
Rating System
condition component is similarly sup­
To more closely align the supervisory ported by four subcomponents that
rating system for bank holding compa­ reflect an assessment of the quality
nies with its supervisory practices, the of the banking organization’s capital,
Federal Reserve in December 2004 assets, earnings, and liquidity. A simpli­
adopted a revised bank holding com­ fied version of the rating system that
pany rating system, effective January 1, requires only the assignment of the risk-
2005. The increased complexity of the management component rating and
U.S. banking industry has necessitated composite rating (C) will be applied to
a shift over time in the focus of the noncomplex bank holding companies
Federal Reserve’s supervisory practices having assets of less than $1 billion.
for bank holding companies away from
historical analyses of financial condition
Bank Secrecy Act and
toward more-forward-looking assess­
Anti–Money Laundering
ments of risk management and financial
factors. Under the revised rating system, The Federal Reserve in 2004 issued a
each bank holding company is assigned number of supervisory letters to domes­
a composite rating based on an eval­ tic and foreign banking organizations on
uation and rating of its managerial and such topics as examination procedures
financial condition and an assessment for customer identification programs
of future potential risk to its subsidiary and the imposition of ‘‘special mea­
depository institution(s). The three main sures’’ by the Department of the Trea­
components of the new RFI/C (D) rating sury on certain jurisdictions and for­
system are Risk management, Financial eign financial institutions suspected of
condition, and potential Impact of the being of ‘‘primary money laundering
parent company and nondepository sub­ concern.’’
sidiaries (collectively, nondepository The Federal Reserve is actively work­
entities) on the subsidiary depository ing with the other federal and state
institution(s). The rating of a fourth banking agencies to develop inter­
component, Depository institution, will agency Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money­
generally mirror the primary regulator’s laundering examination procedures to be

100 91st Annual Report, 2004
Implementing the Basel II Framework in the United States
We are embarking on an effort to achieve considerably more precision in
correlating the riskiness of an institution’s activities and its regulatory capital.
Roger Ferguson, Vice Chairman, Board of Governors
November 2004
Preparation continued during 2004 for Scope of Application in the United States
implementation in the United States of a
Final rules for application of the Basel II
new international agreement on capital ade­
framework in the United States are still
quacy for banking organizations.1 The new
being developed. It is expected that only
agreement, familiarly known as Basel II,
a small number of large, internationally
sets forth a framework for ensuring that
active U.S. banking organizations will be
banks hold adequate capital against risk
subject to the new framework. Those
and builds on the initial international capi­
institutions would be required to use the
tal agreement adopted in 1988.
most advanced options of the framework
The original Basel Capital Accord,
for determining their risk-based capital
though widely considered to have achieved
requirements (the advanced internal-
its principal objectives of promoting finan­
ratings-based approach, or A-IRB, for
cial stability and providing an equitable
credit risk and the advanced measurement
basis for competition among internation­
approaches, or AMA, for operational risk).
ally active banks, has in recent years been
Other U.S. banking organizations would
viewed as too simple to address the activi­
not be required to adopt Basel II but could
ties of today’s large, complex banking
opt to do so, provided they could demon­
organizations. Basel II creates a stronger
strate the ability to develop the risk mea­
framework for these organizations through
sures required as inputs to determine capi­
minimum capital requirements that are
tal requirements. Those banks not adopting
more sensitive to each organization’s risk
Basel II would continue to operate under
profile and that reinforce incentives for
existing capital rules.
strong risk management.2
The Basel II framework contains provi­
sions addressing credit risk (the risk of loss Implementation Plan and Timetable
due to failure of a counterparty to meet
its obligations) and operational risk (the The U.S. banking and thrift agencies have
risk of loss resulting from inadequate or been coordinating their efforts to imple­
failed internal processes, people, or sys­
tems or from external events).3 It relies on the Basel Committee on Banking Supervision,
three pillars—minimum capital require­ which is made up of representatives of the cen­
ments, supervisory review, and market tral banks or other supervisory authorities of the
discipline—and is the basis on which G-10 countries plus Luxembourg and has its
revisions to existing U.S. capital ade­ secretariat at the Bank for International Settle­
ments in Basel, Switzerland. See www.bis.org/
quacy regulations and standards are being
publ/bcbs107.htm.
developed.
2. See ‘‘Capital Standards for Banks: The
Evolving Basel Accord,’’ Federal Reserve Bulle­
1. The final agreement, titled ‘‘International tin, vol. 89 (September 2003), pp. 395–405
Convergence of Capital Measurement and (www.federalreserve.gov/pubs/bulletin/default.htm).
Capital Standards: A Revised Framework’’ and 3. Basel I was updated in 1996 to account for
published in June 2004, was developed by market risk.

Banking Supervision and Regulation 101
ment Basel II. The new rules are expected capital requirements is seen as among the
to take effect on January 1, 2008; before most significant steps institutions can take
then, institutions subject to the new rules in advance of the issuance of final rules
will be required to conduct a year of paral­ and associated guidance. The qualification
lel calculations—that is, to simultaneously process will be iterative. The plans will
calculate capital requirements according to serve as instruments of communication
the Basel II-based rules and the current between institutions and their supervisors
rules. Both supervisors and bankers have in their home country and other juris­
much to accomplish before the target 2008 dictions. They are expected to include a
date, including the writing of final rules self-assessment by the institution, a gap
and guidance by the agencies and the analysis (based on the self-assessment)
development and execution of an accept­ identifying areas needing additional work,
able, detailed written plan for implementa­ an action plan for addressing shortcom­
tion by each adopting institution. ings, objectively measurable milestones,
and an assessment of resources needed.
Revision of Regulations
Issuance of Supervisory Guidance
Comments on an advance notice of pro­
posed rulemaking issued in August 2003 During 2005 the agencies will continue to
that set forth possible revisions to the capi­ develop supervisory guidance concerning
tal adequacy regulations are currently being the various portfolios and risk exposures
reviewed. Importantly, all U.S. banking addressed by Basel II; draft supervisory
organizations would continue to be sub­ guidance on corporate and retail credit risk
ject to leverage ratio requirements and to and operational risk has already been pub­
prompt corrective action regulations, which lished. The guidance will set forth super­
closely link enforcement actions to banks’ visory expectations for banking organiza­
capital levels. tions adopting the Basel II-based rules, for
The agencies expect that a notice of pro­ example, the components and characteris­
posed rulemaking on possible revisions tics of an acceptable risk-measurement and
to the regulations will be published in risk-management infrastructure.
mid-2005. Final rules are expected in the
second quarter of 2006. The agencies are
Completion of Quantitative Studies
also considering possible changes to risk-
based capital regulations for U.S. institu­ In 2004 the agencies began a fourth Quan­
tions not subject to the Basel II-based reg­ titative Impact Study (QIS-4) to evaluate
ulations; these changes are expected to the potential effects of U.S. implementa­
become effective at the same time as the tion of the Basel II framework and a ‘‘loss
Basel II-based regulations. data collection exercise’’ (LDCE) focused
on operational risk. About thirty banking
organizations are participating in QIS-4;
Qualification for Using
about twenty are participating in the
Advanced Approaches
LDCE. These studies are intended to help
The agencies have issued guidance setting banking organizations and their supervisors
forth their ideas about the qualification pro­ better understand the implications of the
cess for Basel II in the United States. The Basel II framework for regulatory capital
development of a detailed written plan and may provide some insight on impli­
for implementing the A-IRB and AMA cations of the new approaches for competi­
approaches for determining risk-based tion within the banking industry.

102 91st Annual Report, 2004
released in 2005. The Department of the supervisory policies for internation­
Treasury’s Financial Crimes Enforce­ ally active banking organizations and
ment Network (FinCEN) has partici­ to improve the stability of the interna­
pated in this initiative. tional banking system. The efforts are
To support this work and to pro­ described in the following sections.
vide a forum for the federal banking
agencies to discuss matters related Capital Adequacy
to Bank Secrecy Act/anti-money­
During 2004 the Federal Reserve con­
laundering examination and training, a
tinued to participate in a number of tech­
Bank Secrecy Act Working Group was
nical working groups of the Basel Com­
formed in 2004 under the FFIEC. The
mittee in efforts to develop the revised
working group, which also includes
Basel framework (familiarly referred
FinCEN and state bank regulators,
to as Basel II), which was published
complements other interagency and
in June, and to address issues not fully
international efforts, such as the Bank
resolved in that framework. In particu­
Fraud Working Group, the Financial
lar, the Federal Reserve participated in
Action Task Force, and various super­
a joint Basel Committee–International
visors committees within the Basel
Organization of Securities Commissions
Committee on Banking Supervision.
(IOSCO) working group on the trading
The Federal Reserve participates in
book to review issues related to counter-
another such group, the BSA Advisory
party credit risk, double default effects
Group, which was established by statute
(reflecting the low probability that both
to seek ways to reduce unnecessary bur­
a borrower and its guarantor will default
den created by the BSA and to increase
at the same time), and the definition of
the utility of data gathered under the act
the trading book.
to aid regulators and law enforcement.
In addition, through this group, the Fed­
Risk Management
eral Reserve assists the Treasury Depart­
ment in providing feedback to financial The Federal Reserve contributed to
institutions on the reporting of suspi­ several supervisory policy papers,
cious activity. Finally, staff of the Divi­ reports, and recommendations issued
sion of Banking Supervision and Regu­ by the Basel Committee during 2004
lation engage in outreach to the financial that were generally aimed at improv­
services industry by, for example, speak­ ing the supervision of banking organiza­
ing at banking conferences to promote tions’ risk-management practices.
best practices to combat money launder­
ing and terrorist financing. • ‘‘Consolidated Know-Your-Customer
Risk Management,’’ issued in Octo­
ber, provides guidance to help interna­
International Guidance on
tional banking organizations establish
Supervisory Policies
centralized processes for sharing
As a member of the Basel Committee information and for coordinating and
on Banking Supervision, the Federal promulgating customer due diligence
Reserve in 2004 participated in efforts policies and procedures on a consoli­
to revise the international capital regime dated basis. The guidance, which
and to develop international supervisory builds on Basel Committee publica­
guidance. The Federal Reserve’s goals tions issued in 2001 and 2003, also
in these activities are to advance sound encourages government jurisdictions

Banking Supervision and Regulation 103
to facilitate consolidated customer due • ‘‘Principles for the Home–Host Rec­
diligence risk management by provid­ ognition of AMA Operational Risk
ing a legal framework that allows Capital,’’ issued in January, addresses
overseas subsidiaries and affiliates of industry concerns about practical
banking organizations to share infor­ impediments to the cross-border
mation with their head offices or par­ implementation of the advanced mea­
ent banks. surement approaches for operational
risk, an element of the Basel II
• ‘‘Principles for the Management and framework.
Supervision of Interest Rate Risk,’’
issued in July, describes the pillar 2 Joint Forum
(supervisory review) approach to
calculating interest rate risk under In its work with the Basel Committee,
Basel II. The paper reflects comments the Federal Reserve also continued its
received on a September 2003 consul­ participation in the Joint Forum—a
tative paper. group made up of representatives of the
committee, IOSCO, and the Interna­
• ‘‘Implementation of Basel II: Practi­ tional Association of Insurance Supervi­
cal Considerations,’’ issued in July, sors. The Joint Forum works to increase
discusses the costs and benefits of mutual understanding of issues related
Basel II implementation from the to the supervision of firms operating
point of view of non–G10 countries, in each of the financial sectors. The
focusing in particular on potential Joint Forum issued three publications in
changes to the legal and regulatory 2004:
framework and on resource and train­
ing requirements. • ‘‘Credit Risk Transfer,’’ issued in
October, reviews the rapid growth in
• In January the Basel Committee credit risk transfer products, such as
issued changes to the internal-ratings­ single-name credit default swaps and
based approach to securitization expo­ collateralized debt obligations, and
sures under Basel II, in response to concludes that these markets have
industry concerns related to the com­ provided banking organizations with
plexity of the proposal and the opera­ significantly more liquid and efficient
tional burdens of implementation. methods of trading and diversifying
their credit risks. The report notes that
• In January the Basel Committee although these products do not raise
announced its decision to base the immediate and significant financial
Basel II framework on unexpected stability concerns, financial organiza­
losses rather than a combination of tions should adopt appropriate risk-
unexpected and expected losses, in management practices when conduct­
response to industry requests and ing business in these products.
comments. However, under the frame­
work, banks would be required to • ‘‘Outsourcing in Financial Services,’’
compare provisions with expected issued in August, discusses the key
losses and to deduct any deficiency issues and risks associated with finan­
from capital. Excess provisions would cial firms’ outsourcing of significant
be eligible for inclusion in tier 2 capi­ parts of their regulated and unregu­
tal, subject to a cap. lated activities to third parties and sets

104 91st Annual Report, 2004
forth principles to help firms mitigate The Federal Reserve and the Basel
these risks. Committee also worked with other inter­
national regulatory organizations, such
• ‘‘Financial Disclosure in the Banking, as IOSCO, the International Association
Insurance and Securities Sectors: of Insurance Supervisors, the World
Issues and Analysis,’’ issued in May, Bank, and the Financial Stability Forum,
outlines the findings of a working as part of an organization called the
group established to follow up on Monitoring Group, to promote stronger
recommendations contained in a 1999 international audit standards and prac­
report that provided advice to super­ tices. This effort led to the adoption by
visors on enhancing financial institu­ the International Federation of Accoun­
tions’ public disclosures of their finan­ tants (IFAC) of comprehensive reforms
cial risks. that will result in greater public over­
sight of IFAC’s audit-standard-setting
activities.
International Accounting
and Disclosure
The Federal Reserve participates in the Sarbanes–Oxley Act
Basel Committee’s Accounting Task
Force and represents the Basel Commit­ During 2004 the Federal Reserve con­
tee at international meetings on account­ tinued to evaluate the effects of the
ing, auditing, and disclosure issues Sarbanes–Oxley Act on banking organi­
affecting global banking organizations. zations. The effort involved the Federal
In particular, officials of the Federal Reserve’s working closely with banking
Reserve represent the Basel Committee organizations and their external audi­
at meetings that address financial instru­ tors to better understand the challenges
ments accounting and disclosure issues they are encountering in complying with
associated with international accounting the sections of the act that relate to
standards. In addition, an official of the internal controls. It also involved dia­
Federal Reserve is a member of the logue with the SEC and the Public
Standards Advisory Council of the Inter­ Company Accounting Oversight Board
national Accounting Standards Board (PCAOB) on various interpretative
(IASB). issues related to these matters.
During 2004 the Federal Reserve had In addition, an official of the Federal
a key role in development of the Basel Reserve serves on the Standing Advi­
Committee’s comments on the IASB’s sory Group of the PCAOB, which is
proposed amendment to the guidance in advising the PCAOB as it develops stan­
International Accounting Standard 39 on dards for the external audits of publicly
the optional use of fair value accounting traded companies in the United States.
for financial instruments. In addition, The Federal Reserve also continued in
the Federal Reserve strongly supported 2004 to work with the FDIC and other
the Basel Committee’s efforts to develop banking agencies to consider changes
guidance on improving disclosure for that should be made to the regulations
the purpose of enhancing market dis­ implementing the Federal Deposit
cipline. This support contributed to Insurance Corporation Improvement Act
the finalization of pillar 3 guidance on to promote strong internal controls
improved disclosures in support of and consistency with the Sarbanes–
Basel II. Oxley Act requirements.

Banking Supervision and Regulation 105
Efforts to Enhance Transparency holding companies and their nonbank
subsidiaries.
As part of ongoing efforts to promote The FR Y-9 series of reports provides
sound accounting and disclosure prac­ standardized financial statements for
tices by banking organizations, the Fed­ bank holding companies on a consoli­
eral Reserve, together with the other dated and parent-only basis. The reports
banking agencies, in February issued are used to detect emerging financial
guidance on the appropriate accounting problems, review performance and con­
treatment for obligations under certain duct pre-inspection analysis, monitor
types of deferred compensation agree­ and evaluate risk profiles and capital
ments (see SR Letter 04-4). In March adequacy, evaluate proposals for bank
the Federal Reserve and the other bank­ holding company mergers and acquisi­
ing agencies issued guidance identifying tions, and analyze the holding compa­
current sources of generally accepted ny’s overall financial condition. The
accounting principles (GAAP) and nonbank subsidiary reports—FR Y-11,
supervisory guidance that should be FR 2314, and FR Y-7N—aid the Fed­
used by banking organizations in deter­ eral Reserve in determining the condi­
mining their allowance for loan and tion of bank holding companies that are
lease losses (see SR Letter 04-5). The engaged in nonbanking activities and in
Federal Reserve also worked with for­ monitoring the volume, nature, and con­
eign supervisors in developing pillar 3 dition of their nonbanking subsidiaries.
of the Basel II framework, which aims The FR Y-8 report collects information
to enhance banking organizations’ pub­ on transactions between an insured
lic disclosure of their risk exposures, depository institution and its affiliate
capital, and capital adequacy. that are subject to section 23A of the
In October the Federal Reserve sub­ Federal Reserve Act; it enhances the
mitted a comment letter to the Financial Federal Reserve’s ability to monitor
Accounting Standards Board (FASB) on bank exposures to affiliates and to
its ‘‘Fair Value Measurements Exposure ensure compliance with section 23A of
Draft.’’ In addition, Federal Reserve the act.
staff provided comments to FASB on an In March 2004, several revisions to
accounting interpretation that addressed the FR Y-9C report were implemented
impairment of securities. for the purpose of collecting preliminary
data from selected large bank holding
companies on a voluntary basis, improv­
Bank Holding Company ing the reporting of trust preferred secu­
Regulatory Financial Reports rities, and collecting from some of the
largest bank holding companies the
The Federal Reserve requires that U.S. addresses of their web pages display­
bank holding companies periodically ing risk disclosures. In September and
submit reports providing financial and December the electronic filing process
structure information. This information for the FR Y-9 series of reports was
is essential to the supervision of the enhanced to require respondents to per­
organizations and the formulation of form data validation checks prior to
regulations and supervisory policies. filing.
The information is also used in respond­ In May revisions were made to
ing to requests from Congress and clarify the language in the reporting
the public for information on bank forms and instructions for three

106 91st Annual Report, 2004
reports—the Annual Report of Bank ments to the data collection and disclo­
Holding Companies (FR Y-6), the sure process include requiring electronic
Report of Changes in Organizational submission of Call Reports to a central
Structure (FR Y-10), and the Report data repository, moving forward the
of Changes in FBO Organizational deadline for filing reports, and requiring
Structure for foreign banking organiza­ respondents to validate their data before
tions (FR Y-10F). filing. The effort to set up a central data
In June the FR Y-8 was revised to repository is currently in the testing
allow for collection of additional infor­ phase, and the repository is expected to
mation to be used in monitoring compli­ be operational in 2005.
ance with section 23A of the Federal No significant changes were made to
Reserve Act and to assist in monitoring the Call Report in 2004. A proposal was
derivatives transactions and establishing issued in April to make two instruc­
policy for regulating such transactions. tional clarifications to the report.
The report was also revised to reflect Also in 2004, the Report of Assets
interpretations and definitions in Regu­ and Liabilities of U.S. Branches and
lation W, the rule that comprehensively Agencies of Foreign Banks (FFIEC 002)
implements sections 23A and 23B of the was revised, effective in March, to
act. include additional information on
derivatives contracts. A proposal was
issued in August to revise the Country
Commercial Bank
Exposure Report (FFIEC 009) and the
Regulatory Financial Reports
Country Exposure Information Report
As the federal supervisor of state mem­ (FFIEC 009a) to harmonize U.S. data
ber banks, the Federal Reserve, acting in with data on cross-border exposures col­
concert with the other federal banking lected by other countries.
agencies through the FFIEC, requires
banks to submit quarterly Reports of
Federal Financial Institutions
Condition and Income (Call Reports).
Examination Council
Call Reports are the primary source of
data for the supervision and regulation During 2004 the Federal Financial Insti­
of banks and for the ongoing assessment tutions Examination Council focused on
of the overall soundness of the nation’s coordinating the agencies’ efforts in the
banking system. Call Report data, which area of Bank Secrecy Act examination
also serve as benchmarks for the finan­ and training by enhancing communica­
cial information required by many other tion and cooperation with FinCEN, an
Federal Reserve regulatory financial agency within the Treasury Department
reports, are widely used by state and whose mission is to safeguard the finan­
local governments, state banking super­ cial system from terrorist financing,
visors, the banking industry, securities money laundering, and other financial
analysts, and the academic community. crimes. It also continued its efforts to
The Federal Reserve and the other identify and eliminate outdated, unnec­
banking agencies have begun a Call essary, or unduly burdensome regula­
Report modernization project to tions, pursuant to the Economic Growth
improve the timeliness and quality of and Regulatory Paperwork Reduction
supervisory data and to enhance market Act of 1996. The FFIEC made signifi­
discipline by ensuring more timely cant progress on a project to modern­
access by the public. Proposed enhance­ ize and streamline the way in which

Banking Supervision and Regulation 107
the banking agencies collect, process, Banks, as well as through a Systemwide
and distribute quarterly bank financial committee structure, to ensure that key
reports. In addition, the FFIEC contin­ staff members throughout the System
ued its efforts related to examiner train­ participate in identifying requirements
ing and education, consumer compli­ and setting priorities for IT initiatives.
ance issues, bank surveillance processes,
and information-sharing.
SIT Project Management
In 2004 the SIT project management
Supervisory Information
staff, in partnership with other Federal
Technology
Reserve System staff, developed a stra­
Under the direction of the division’s tegic plan for 2005–09 that identifies
chief technology officer, the supervisory opportunities for enhancing business
information technology (SIT) function value through the use of information
within the Division of Banking Super­ technology. Another major activity was
vision and Regulation facilitates the development of a program to ensure
management of information technology compliance with the Federal Informa­
within the Federal Reserve System’s tion Security Management Act. In addi­
supervision function. Its goals are to tion, staff members supported modern­
ensure that ization of the Shared National Credit
program as well as assessments of
• IT initiatives support a broad range of opportunities in the areas of electronic
supervisory activities without duplica­ applications, administrative systems,
tion or overlap; and learning management systems to
improve information technology ser­
• the underlying IT architecture fully vices in conjunction with efforts of
supports those initiatives; Board and Reserve Bank internal IT
providers.
• adequate resources are devoted to
interagency working groups on super­
National Information Center
visory initiatives (for example, Call
Report modernization and the federal The National Information Center (NIC)
bridge investigation initiatives); is the Federal Reserve’s comprehensive
repository for supervisory, financial, and
• the supervision function’s use of tech­ banking structure data and documents.
nology leverages the resources and NIC includes the structure data sys­
expertise available more broadly tem; the National Examination Database
within the Federal Reserve System; (NED), which provides supervisory
and personnel and state banking authorities
with access to NIC data; and the Cen­
• practices that maximize the supervi­ tral Document and Text Repository
sion function’s business value, cost (CDTR), which contains documents
effectiveness, and quality are iden­ supporting the supervisory process.
tified, analyzed, and approved for In 2004 the structure data system was
implementation. modified to adhere to the industry stan­
dards for use of NAICS (North Ameri­
SIT works through assigned staff at the can Industry Classification System)
Board of Governors and the Reserve business activity codes. Changes were

108 91st Annual Report, 2004
made to NED to accommodate the new effort that aims to reduce examination
bank holding company supervisory rat­ costs and improve the timeliness and
ing system and to provide user inter- reliability of data associated with the
operability with PRISM and the CDTR. review of large, syndicated credit facili­
The CDTR was expanded to contain ties of commercial banks. At year-end
examination reports for regional and 2004, BOND had 2,850 registered users
community banking organizations pre­ across the Federal Reserve System, the
pared by Reserve Banks. Significant OCC, the FDIC, and ten state banking
resources continue to be devoted to Call departments.
Report modernization for the FFIEC
Central Data Repository initiative, with
implementation expected in 2005. Staff Development
The Federal Reserve System’s staff
Banking Organization
development program trains staff mem­
National Desktop
bers at the Board, the Reserve Banks,
Supervision of domestic banking orga­ and state banking departments who have
nizations and the U.S. operations of supervisory and regulatory responsi­
foreign banking organizations is sup­ bilities as well as students from for­
ported by an automated application— eign supervisory authorities. Training
the Banking Organization National is offered at the basic, intermediate, and
Desktop (BOND)—that facilitates advanced levels in several disciplines
secure, real-time electronic information- within bank supervision: safety and
sharing and collaboration among federal soundness, information technology,
and state banking regulators. During international banking, and consumer
2004 BOND was enhanced to improve affairs. Classes are conducted in Wash­
its usability, reduce administrative bur­ ington, D.C., as well as at Reserve
den, increase the effectiveness of man­ Banks and other locations.
agement reporting, and facilitate the The Federal Reserve System also
sharing of information related to Basel II participates in training offered by the
and the tracking of parallel-owned banks FFIEC and by certain other regulatory
or bank holding companies (that is, agencies. The System’s involvement
organizations in the United States and includes developing and implementing
another country that have the same con­ basic and advanced training in relation
trolling shareholder). Other enhance­ to various emerging issues as well as
ments included financial holding com­ in specialized areas such as interna­
pany compliance monitoring, improved tional banking, information technology,
data quality edits, the addition of appli­ municipal securities dealing, capital
cations data, and changes to accommo­ markets, payment systems risk, white
date the new RFI/C (D) rating scheme collar crime, and real estate lending. In
for bank holding companies (see the addition, the System co-hosts the World
section ‘‘Bank Holding Company Rat­ Bank Seminar for students from devel­
ing System’’). BOND has been updated oping countries.
to include seamless links to the Federal In 2004 the Federal Reserve trained
Reserve’s Applications Management 2,365 students in System schools, 721 in
and Processing System and to a new schools sponsored by the FFIEC, and 20
system for accessing data on the Shared in other schools, for a total of 3,106,
National Credit program, an interagency including 293 representatives of foreign

Banking Supervision and Regulation 109
Training Programs for Banking Supervision and Regulation, 2004
Number of sessions conducted
Program
Total Regional
Schools or seminars conducted by the Federal Reserve
Core schools
Banking and supervision elements ............................... 8 7
Operations and analysis ......................................... 5 43
Bank management .............................................. 1 2
Report writing .................................................. 12 12
Management skills .............................................. 9 8
Conducting meetings with management .......................... 13 13
Other schools
Credit risk analysis ............................................. 5 3
Examination management ....................................... 6 5
Real estate lending seminar ...................................... 4 3
Senior forum for current banking and regulatory issues ............ 2 2
Basel II corporate activities ...................................... 1 0
Basel II retail activities .......................................... 1 0
Principles of fiduciary supervision ............................... 2 1
Commercial lending essentials for consumer affairs ............... 1 1
Consumer compliance examinations I ............................ 2 0
Consumer compliance examinations II ........................... 2 1
CRA examination techniques .................................... 2 2
CRA risk-focused examinations .................................. 2 2
Fair lending examination techniques ............................. 2 2
Foreign banking organizations ................................... 1 1
Information systems continuing education ........................ 5 5
Capital markets seminars ........................................ 9 7
Technology risk integration ...................................... 6 6
Leadership dynamics ............................................ 6 6
Internal bank ratings and credit risk modeling ..................... 2 2
Seminar for senior supervisors of foreign central banks1
and seven other international courses ........................ 8 0
Other agencies conducting courses 2
Federal Financial Institutions Examination Council .................. 65 5
The Options Institute .............................................. 2 2
1. Conducted jointly with the World Bank. 2. Open to Federal Reserve employees.
central banks (see table). The number of examination in one of three specialty
training days in 2004 totaled 17,738. areas: safety and soundness, consumer
The System gave scholarship assis­ affairs, or information technology. In
tance to the states for training their 2004, 135 examiners passed the first
examiners in Federal Reserve and proficiency examination. In the second
FFIEC schools. Through this program, proficiency examination, 87 examiners
410 state examiners were trained—242 passed the safety and soundness exami­
in Federal Reserve courses, 158 in nation, 29 passed the consumer affairs
FFIEC programs, and 10 in other examination, and 6 passed the informa­
courses. tion technology examination. The over­
A staff member seeking an examin­ all pass rate for these examinations was
er’s commission is required to take a 79 percent. At the end of 2004, the
first proficiency examination, which System had 1,223 field examiners, of
tests knowledge of a core body of infor­ which 950 were commissioned (see
mation, and also a second proficiency table).

110 91st Annual Report, 2004
Year-End Reserve Bank Supervision Levels, 2000–2004
Type of staff 2004 2003 2002 2001 2000
Field examination staff ......... 1,223 1,239 1,234 1,242 1,172
Commissioned field staff ..... 950 936 892 861 786
Regulation of the considers the financial and managerial
U.S. Banking Structure resources of the applicant, the future
prospects of both the applicant and the
The Federal Reserve administers sev­
firm to be acquired, the convenience and
eral federal statutes in relation to bank
needs of the community to be served,
holding companies, financial holding
the potential public benefits, the com­
companies, member banks, and foreign
petitive effects of the proposal, and the
banking organizations—the Bank Hold­
applicant’s ability to make available to
ing Company Act, the Bank Merger Act,
the Federal Reserve information deemed
the Change in Bank Control Act, and
necessary to ensure compliance with
the International Banking Act. In admin­
applicable law. In the case of a foreign
istering these statutes, the Federal
banking organization seeking to acquire
Reserve acts on a variety of proposals
control of a U.S. bank, the Federal
that would directly or indirectly affect
Reserve also considers whether the for­
the structure of U.S. banking at the local,
eign bank is subject to comprehensive
regional, and national levels; the inter­
supervision or regulation on a consoli­
national operations of domestic banking
dated basis by its home country supervi­
organizations; and the U.S. banking
sor. Data on decisions regarding domes­
operations of foreign banks.
tic and international applications in 2004
are shown in the accompanying table.
Bank holding companies generally
Bank Holding Company Act
may engage in only those activities that
Under the Bank Holding Company Act, the Board has previously determined
a corporation or similar organization to be closely related to banking under
must obtain the Federal Reserve’s section 4(c)(8) of the Bank Holding
approval before forming a bank holding Company Act. Since 1996, the act has
company through the acquisition of one provided an expedited prior-notice pro­
or more banks in the United States. cedure for certain permissible nonbank
Once formed, a bank holding company activities and for acquisitions of small
must receive Federal Reserve approval banks and nonbank entities. Since that
before acquiring or establishing addi­ time the act has also permitted well-run
tional banks. The act also identifies bank holding companies that satisfy cer­
activities permissible for bank holding tain criteria to commence certain other
companies; depending on the circum­ nonbank activities on a de novo basis
stances, these activities may or may not without first obtaining Federal Reserve
require Federal Reserve approval in approval.
advance of their commencement. Since 2000, the Bank Holding Com­
When reviewing a bank holding com­ pany Act has permitted the creation
pany application or notice that requires of a special type of bank holding com­
prior approval, the Federal Reserve pany called a financial holding com­

Banking Supervision and Regulation 111
Decisions by the Federal Reserve on Domestic and International Applications, 2004
Action under authority delegated
by the Board of Governors
Direct action
Proposal Board o b f y G th o e v ernors Div D is ir io ec n t o o r f o B f a t n h k e i ng O of f f t i h c e e Federal Total
Supervision and Secretary Reserve Banks
Regulation
Approved Denied Permitted Approved Denied Approved Approved Permitted
Formation of bank
holding
company ....... 9 0 0 0 0 0 135 43 187
Merger of bank
holding
company ....... 14 0 1 0 0 3 27 25 70
Acquisition or
retention of
bank ............ 16 0 1 0 0 11 114 26 168
Acquisition of
nonbank ........ 0 0 31 0 0 5 0 108 144
Merger of bank ...... 4 0 0 0 0 9 67 0 80
Change in control .... 0 0 1 0 0 0 0 124 125
Establishment of a
branch, agency,
or representative
officebya
foreign bank .... 1 0 0 8 0 0 0 0 9
Other ............... 134 0 0 85 0 98 941 507 1,765
Total ................ 178 0 34 93 0 126 1,284 833 2,548
pany. Financial holding companies are agency. If the institution surviving the
allowed to engage in a broader range of merger is a state member bank, the Fed­
nonbank activities than are traditional eral Reserve has primary jurisdiction.
bank holding companies. Among other Before acting on a merger proposal, the
things, they may affiliate with securi­ Federal Reserve considers the financial
ties firms and insurance companies and and managerial resources of the appli­
engage in certain merchant banking cant, the future prospects of the existing
activities. Bank holding companies and combined organizations, the con­
seeking financial holding company sta­ venience and needs of the community
tus must file a written declaration with to be served, and the competitive effects
the Federal Reserve. In 2004, 47 domes­ of the proposed merger. It also consid­
tic financial holding company declara­ ers the views of certain other agen­
tions and 5 foreign bank declarations cies regarding the competitive factors
were approved. involved in the transaction. In 2004 the
Federal Reserve approved 80 merger
applications.
Bank Merger Act
When the FDIC, the OCC, or the
The Bank Merger Act requires that OTS has jurisdiction over a merger, the
all proposals involving the merger of Federal Reserve is asked to comment
insured depository institutions be acted on the competitive factors related to the
on by the appropriate federal banking proposal. By using standard terminol­

112 91st Annual Report, 2004
ogy in assessing competitive factors agencies, commercial lending company
in merger proposals, the four agencies subsidiaries, or representative offices in
have sought to ensure consistency in the United States.
administering the Bank Merger Act. The In reviewing proposals, the Federal
Federal Reserve submitted 534 reports Reserve generally considers whether
on competitive factors to the other agen­ the foreign bank is subject to compre­
cies in 2004. hensive supervision or regulation on a
consolidated basis by its home country
supervisor. It also considers whether the
Change in Bank Control Act home country supervisor has consented
to the establishment of the U.S. office;
The Change in Bank Control Act
the financial condition and resources of
requires persons seeking control of a
the foreign bank and its existing U.S.
U.S. bank or bank holding company to
operations; the managerial resources
obtain approval from the appropriate
of the foreign bank; whether the home
federal banking agency before complet­
country supervisor shares information
ing the transaction. The Federal Reserve
regarding the operations of the foreign
is responsible for reviewing changes in
bank with other supervisory authorities;
the control of state member banks and
whether the foreign bank has provided
bank holding companies. In its review,
adequate assurances that information
the Federal Reserve considers the finan­
concerning its operations and activities
cial position, competence, experience,
will be made available to the Federal
and integrity of the acquiring person;
Reserve, if deemed necessary to deter­
the effect of the proposed change on the
mine and enforce compliance with
financial condition of the bank or bank
applicable law; whether the foreign bank
holding company being acquired; the
has adopted and implemented proce­
effect of the proposed change on compe­
dures to combat money laundering and
tition in any relevant market; the com­
whether the home country of the foreign
pleteness of the information submitted
bank is developing a legal regime to
by the acquiring person; and whether
address money laundering or is partici­
the proposed change would have an
pating in multilateral efforts to combat
adverse effect on the federal deposit
money laundering; and the record of the
insurance funds. As part of the process,
foreign bank with respect to compliance
the Federal Reserve may contact other
with U.S. law.
regulatory or law enforcement agen­
In 2004 the Federal Reserve approved
cies for information about relevant
9 applications by foreign banks to estab­
individuals.
lish branches, agencies, and representa­
In 2004 the Federal Reserve approved
tive offices in the United States.
125 changes in control of state member
banks and bank holding companies.
Overseas Investments by
U.S. Banking Organizations
International Banking Act
U.S. banking organizations may engage
The International Banking Act, as in a broad range of activities overseas.
amended by the Foreign Bank Supervi­ Many of the activities are conducted
sion Enhancement Act of 1991, requires indirectly through Edge Act and agree­
foreign banks to obtain Federal Reserve ment corporation subsidiaries. Although
approval before establishing branches, most foreign investments are made

Banking Supervision and Regulation 113
under general consent procedures that Stock Repurchases by
involve only after-the-fact notification Bank Holding Companies
to the Federal Reserve, large and other
significant investments require prior A bank holding company may repur­
approval. In 2004 the Federal Reserve chase its own shares from its share­
approved 27 proposals for significant holders. When the company borrows
overseas investments by U.S. banking money to buy the shares, the trans­
organizations. The Federal Reserve also action increases the company’s debt
approved 14 applications to make addi­ and decreases its equity. The Federal
tional investments through an Edge Act Reserve may object to stock repurchases
or agreement corporation, 5 applications by holding companies that fail to meet
to extend the corporate existence of certain standards, including the Board’s
or acquire an Edge Act corporation, and capital adequacy guidelines. In 2004
4 applications to establish or acquire an the Federal Reserve reviewed 16 stock
agreement corporation. repurchase proposals by bank holding
companies; all were approved by a
Reserve Bank under delegated authority.
Applications by Member Banks
Public Notice of
State member banks must obtain Fed­ Federal Reserve Decisions
eral Reserve approval to establish
domestic branches, and all member Certain decisions by the Federal Reserve
banks (including national banks) must that involve a bank holding company, a
obtain Federal Reserve approval to bank merger, a change in control, or the
establish foreign branches. When establishment of a new U.S. banking
reviewing proposals to establish domes­ presence by a foreign bank are made
tic branches, the Federal Reserve con­ known to the public by an order or an
siders the scope and nature of the announcement. Orders state the decision,
banking activities to be conducted. the essential facts of the application or
When reviewing proposals for foreign notice, and the basis for the decision;
branches, the Federal Reserve consid­ announcements state only the decision.
ers, among other things, the condition of All orders and announcements are made
the bank and the bank’s experience in public immediately; they are subse­
international banking. In 2004 the Fed­ quently reported in the Board’s weekly
eral Reserve acted on new and merger- H.2 statistical release and in the Federal
related branch proposals for 1,428 Reserve Bulletin. The H.2 release also
domestic branches and granted prior contains announcements of applications
approval for the establishment of and notices received by the Federal
34 new foreign branches. Reserve upon which action has not yet
State member banks must also obtain been taken. For each pending application
Federal Reserve approval to establish and notice, the related H.2A contains the
financial subsidiaries. These subsidiaries deadline for comments. The Board’s web
may engage in activities that are finan­ site (www.federalreserve.gov) provides
cial in nature or incidental to financial information on orders and announce­
activities, including securities and insur­ ments as well as a guide for U.S. and
ance agency-related activities. In 2004, foreign banking organizations submitting
2 applications for financial subsidiaries applications or notices to the Federal
were approved. Reserve.

114 91st Annual Report, 2004
Timely Processing of Applications the credit is used to trade debt and
equity securities. The Board’s Regula­
The Federal Reserve sets internal target
tion U limits the amount of credit that
time frames for the processing of appli­
may be provided by lenders other than
cations. The setting of internal targets
brokers and dealers when the credit is
promotes efficiency at the Board and the
used to purchase or carry publicly held
Reserve Banks and reduces the burden
equity securities if the loan is secured by
on applicants. Generally, the length of
those or other publicly held equity secu­
the target period ranges from twelve
rities. The Board’s Regulation X applies
to sixty days, depending on the type of
these credit limitations, or margin
application or notice filed. In 2004,
requirements, to certain borrowers and
92 percent of decisions were made
to certain credit extensions, such as
within the target time period.
credit obtained from foreign lenders by
U.S. citizens.
Enforcement of Several regulatory agencies enforce
Other Laws and Regulations the Board’s securities credit regulations.
The SEC, the National Association of
The Federal Reserve’s enforcement Securities Dealers, and the national
responsibilities also extend to financial securities exchanges examine brokers
disclosures by state member banks, and dealers for compliance with Regula­
securities credit, and extensions of credit tion T. With respect to compliance with
to executive officers. Regulation U, the federal banking agen­
cies examine banks under their respec­
tive jurisdictions; the Farm Credit
Financial Disclosures by
Administration, the National Credit
State Member Banks
Union Administration, and the OTS
State member banks that issue securities examine lenders under their respective
registered under the Securities Exchange jurisdictions; and the Federal Reserve
Act of 1934 must disclose certain infor­ examines other Regulation U lenders.
mation of interest to investors, including Since 1998, the Board has published
annual and quarterly financial reports a list of foreign stocks that meet the
and proxy statements. By statute, the requirements of section 220.11 of Regu­
Board’s financial disclosure rules must lation T (Credit by Brokers and Deal­
be substantially similar to those of ers), thereby making them eligible for
the SEC. At the end of 2004, 15 state margin treatment at broker–dealers on
member banks were registered with the the same basis as domestic margin secu­
Board under the Securities Exchange rities. In March 2004 the Board removed
Act. all the stocks from its Foreign Mar­
gin Stock List because the stocks had
not been recertified under procedures
Securities Credit
approved by the Board in 1990. For­
Under the Securities Exchange Act, the eign stocks may also qualify as margin
Board is responsible for regulating securities by being deemed to have
credit in certain transactions involving a ‘‘ready market’’ under the SEC’s
the purchase or carrying of securities. net capital rule (17 CFR 240.15c3-3)
The Board’s Regulation T limits the (see the March 3, 2004, press release
amount of credit that may be provided at www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/
by securities brokers and dealers when press/all/2004/).

Banking Supervision and Regulation 115
Extensions of Credit by State Member Banks to their Executive Officers, 2003 and 2004
Range of interest
Period Number Amount (dollars) rates charged
(percent)
2003
October 1–December 31 ................ 590 66,901,000 0.0–18.0
2004
January 1–March 31 ................... 545 62,624,000 0.0–18.0
April 1–June 30 ........................ 576 79,207,000 0.0–18.0
July 1–September 30 ................... 479 72,401,000 0.0–19.8
October 1–December 31 ................ 476 53,083,000 0.0–20.8
Source. Call Reports.
Extensions of Federal Reserve Membership
Credit to Executive Officers
At the end of 2004, 2,794 banks were
Under section 22(g) of the Federal members of the Federal Reserve System
Reserve Act, a state member bank must and were operating 51,864 branches.
include in its quarterly Call Report These banks accounted for 37 percent of
information on all extensions of credit all commercial banks in the United
by the bank to its executive officers States and for 73 percent of all commer­
since the date of the preceding report. cial banking offices.
The accompanying table summarizes
this information for 2004.

117
Federal Reserve Banks
The Federal Reserve Banks contribute environment, see the box ‘‘Reserve
to the setting of national monetary pol­ Bank Services in a Changing Payments
icy and are involved in the supervision Market.’’)
and regulation of banks and other finan­ In addition to acting to control costs
cial entities. They also operate a nation­ for priced services, the Reserve Banks
wide payments system, distribute the have undertaken a number of projects
nation’s currency and coin, and serve as to reduce support and overhead costs.
fiscal agent and depository to the United They have consolidated operations
States. locally and nationally, adopted more-
efficient practices, and adjusted staffing
levels commensurate with a shrinking
Major Initiatives
base of internal customers requiring sup­
In 2004, the Federal Reserve Banks con­ port services. Reserve Bank support and
tinued to pursue efficiencies in their overhead costs, including national sup­
operations, including the provision of port services, decreased $68 million, or
priced services, and in support and 6 percent, from 2003 to 2004.1 Over the
overhead. same period, ANP associated with sup­
The Reserve Banks are processing a port and overhead areas declined 700, or
declining number of checks as consum­ 8 percent.2
ers and businesses make more payments Over the past several years, the
electronically. Because of the decline, Reserve Banks have consolidated their
the Banks have found it challenging to employee health and welfare plans,
fully recover their costs as required by human resources information systems,
the Monetary Control Act of 1980. In and payroll-processing operations.
response, the Banks are fundamentally These plans, systems, and operations
restructuring their check operations. previously were unique to each Bank
During the year, they completed the first and were managed and administered
phase of a check restructuring initiative, from each Reserve Bank head office.
reducing the number of Federal Reserve Although some of the consolidations are
check-processing and check-adjustment not yet complete, each has already gen­
locations. The initiative has reduced erated significant cost savings. The sav­
Reserve Bank check operating expenses ings resulting from staff reductions in
and staffing levels; since 1999, the num­ support and overhead functions is
ber of employees processing checks has expected to be $3.9 million when fully
declined about 25 percent, to approxi­ implemented in 2006. The savings
mately 4,000 at the end of 2004. As the resulting from lower vendor fees and
market for check collection services
continues to decline, the Banks will pur­
sue additional restructuring efforts and 1. National support services include functions
and projects managed by a Reserve Bank on
staffing reductions to achieve full cost
behalf of the other Reserve Banks.
recovery. (For a broad discussion of 2. ANP is the number of employees during a
the Reserve Banks’ response to today’s year in terms of full-time positions.

118 91st Annual Report, 2004
Reserve Bank Services in a Changing Payments Market
More payments in the United States are wide-ranging dialogue on improving the
now being made electronically than by payments system by sponsoring several
check. The number of checks written annu­ conferences and seminars and by conduct­
ally peaked in the mid-1990s at around ing other outreach activities.
50 billion. By 2003, the number was down The Federal Reserve also worked with
to about 37 billion. In contrast, the number the financial services industry, the legal
of payments made electronically via credit community, consumer and business repre­
and debit cards, the automated clearing­ sentatives, and Congress to enact the
house (ACH), and electronic benefit trans­ Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act
fer cards was about 45 billion in 2003, up (Check 21), which facilitates (but does not
from approximately 15 billion in the mid­ mandate) the greater use of electronics
1990s. in the processing of checks. The Board
The shift largely reflects a growing con­ amended two of its regulations concerned
sumer and business preference for mak­ with check processing (Regulations J and
ing payments electronically, particularly by CC) to implement the law and has worked
debit card. It has also been spurred by the closely with the Reserve Banks and the
financial services industry through its use industry to educate the public about the
of new technologies, introduction of new implications of Check 21 for consumers.
products and services, and adoption of The Board also clarified the application of
operating rules and standards that support the consumer protections in Regulation E
the greater use of electronic payments. For to electronic payments made via check
example, recent industry rule changes have conversion.1
enabled businesses to use the informa­ The ongoing shift to electronic payments
tion on a consumer’s check to transfer has affected the Reserve Banks’ check-
funds electronically using the ACH, a pro­ processing operations. The number of
cess now commonly known as check checks collected annually through the
conversion. Banks has fallen nearly 20 percent since
The Federal Reserve has supported and
helped facilitate this ongoing transition to a
1. Consumer information on Check 21 and
more-electronic payments system. Its Pay­
electronic check conversion is available at
ments System Development Committee,
www.federalreserve.gov/consumers.htm. Bank­
chaired by Vice Chairman Roger Ferguson ing industry educational and reference material
and Minneapolis Federal Reserve Bank on Check 21 is available at www.ffiec.gov/
President Gary Stern, has promoted a exam/check21/default.htm.
from lower plan costs due to consoli­ innovation and to increase payments
dation of health and welfare plans is system efficiency by reducing legal
expected to be $25 million in 2005. impediments to check truncation.
The other significant initiative affect­
ing Reserve Bank check operations in
Developments in
2004 was the introduction of products,
Federal Reserve Priced Services
services, and associated infrastructure
related to the Check Clearing for the The Monetary Control Act of 1980
21st Century Act (Check 21), which requires that the Federal Reserve set
took effect in October. Check 21 is fees for providing ‘‘priced services’’ to
intended to foster payments system depository institutions that, over the

Federal Reserve Banks 119
1999, to fewer than 14 billion in 2004. And with a declining check market, the Banks
the decline is accelerating, as the Banks also have begun to fundamentally restruc­
processed 12 percent fewer checks in 2004 ture the location and nature of their
than in 2003. As a result, the revenue the national check-processing operations. The
Banks earn from providing check collec­ number of offices at which checks are pro­
tion services to depository institutions has cessed was reduced from forty-five at the
begun to decline. Over the past five years, beginning of 2003 to thirty-two by the end
the Banks also made a significant invest­ of 2004. A further reduction, to twenty-
ment in modernizing and improving three offices, will be completed in early
the longer-term efficiency of their check- 2006. As part of these changes, five
processing operations. regional sites dedicated solely to process­
This combination of market and busi­ ing checks have been closed. Additional
ness factors has challenged the Reserve restructuring will occur in response to con­
Banks’ ability to meet the expectations of tinued market changes in the use of checks.
the Monetary Control Act of 1980 (MCA). Major improvements in the operational
The MCA requires that the Banks set fees efficiency and productivity of Reserve
for providing payment services (including Bank check-collection operations have
check collection services) to depository resulted from these initiatives. The Cincin­
institutions to recover, over the long run, nati check-processing office, for example,
all the direct, indirect, and imputed costs of now processes both its own usual volume
providing the services, including the taxes and the checks previously processed at the
that would have been paid and the return Indianapolis, Louisville, and Charleston
on equity that would have been earned had offices. The number of employees provid­
the services been provided by a private ing check-collection services has been
firm. reduced to approximately 4,000, about one-
To better meet the MCA requirements, fourth fewer than in 1999 and the lowest
the Reserve Banks have undertaken a range level since enactment of MCA. Although
of cost-reduction and revenue-generation the one-time charges associated with the
initiatives as part of a long-term business restructuring efforts have been substantial,
strategy to facilitate the greater use of elec­ the costs of ongoing operations have
tronics in check processing. These initia­ decreased. As a result, the Reserve Banks
tives have included streamlining manage­ expect to recover fully all the costs of
ment structures, reducing staffing levels, providing check-collection services in 2005
increasing productivity, and selectively and to continue to meet their broader statu­
raising fees. To better align their operations tory obligations over the longer term.
long run, recover all the direct and indi­ years, the Federal Reserve Banks have
rect costs of providing the services as recovered 97.5 percent of their priced
well as the imputed costs, such as the services costs, including the PSAF
income taxes that would have been paid (table).
and the return on equity that would have
been earned had the services been pro­ costs: interest on debt, sales taxes, and assess­
vided by a private firm. The imputed ments for deposit insurance by the Federal Deposit
costs and imputed profit are collectively Insurance Corporation. Also allocated to priced
services are assets and personnel costs of the
referred to as the private-sector adjust­
Board of Governors that are related to priced
ment factor (PSAF).3 Over the past ten
services; in the pro forma statements at the end of
this chapter, Board expenses are included in oper­
3. In addition to income taxes and the return on ating expenses and Board assets are part of long-
equity, the PSAF is made up of three imputed term assets.

120 91st Annual Report, 2004
Priced Services Cost Recovery, 1995–2004
Millions of dollars except as noted
Operating
Revenue from Targeted return Total Cost recovery
Year expenses and
services1 on equity costs (percent) 3
imputed costs2
1995 ...................... 765.2 752.7 31.5 784.2 97.6
1996 ...................... 815.9 746.4 42.9 789.3 103.4
1997 ...................... 818.8 752.8 54.3 807.1 101.5
1998 ...................... 839.8 743.2 66.8 809.9 103.7
1999 ...................... 867.6 775.7 57.2 832.9 104.2
2000 ...................... 922.8 818.2 98.4 916.6 100.7
2001....................... 960.4 901.9 109.2 1,011.1 95.0
2002 ...................... 918.3 891.7 92.5 984.3 93.3
2003 ...................... 881.7 931.3 104.7 1,036.1 85.1
2004 ...................... 914.6 842.6 112.4 955.0 95.8
1995–2004 ................ 8,705.1 8,156.4 769.9 8,926.5 97.5
Note. Here and elsewhere in this chapter, components 2. For the ten-year period, includes operating expenses
may not sum to totals or yield percentages shown because of $7,490.2 million, imputed costs of $387.7 million, and
of rounding. imputed income taxes of $259.1 million. Also includes
1. For the ten-year period, includes revenue from ser­ the effect of a one-time accounting change net of taxes of
vices of $8,444.2 million and other income and expense $19.4 million for 1995.
(net) of $261.0 million. 3. Revenue from services divided by total costs.
Overall, the price index for priced totaled $709.6 million, of which
services increased 6.7 percent from $45.3 million was attributable to the
2003. Revenue from priced services transportation of commercial checks
amounted to $865.9 million, other between Reserve Bank check-
income related to priced services was processing centers. Revenue amounted
$48.7 million, and costs related to priced to $719.7 million, of which $45.8 mil­
services were $842.6 million, resulting lion was attributable to estimated reve­
in net income of $72.0 million. In 2004, nues derived from the transportation
the Reserve Banks recovered 95.8 per­ of commercial checks between Reserve
cent of total costs of $955 million, Bank check-processing centers, and
including the PSAF.4 other income was $40.5 million. The
resulting net income was $50.5 million.
Check service revenue in 2004 declined
Commercial Check $22.3 million from 2003, largely because
Collection Service of declining volume and customers’
moving to lower-priced products.
In 2004, operating expenses and The Reserve Banks handled 13.9 bil­
imputed costs for the Reserve Banks’ lion checks in 2004, a decrease of
commercial check collection service 12.0 percent from the 15.8 billion
checks handled in 2003 (table). The
decline in Reserve Bank check volume
4. Financial data reported throughout this
is consistent with nationwide trends
chapter—revenue, other income, cost, net reve­
nue, and income before taxes—can be linked to
the pro forma statements at the end of this chapter.
Other income is revenue from investment of clear­ (interest on debt, interest on float, sales taxes, and
ing balances net of earnings credits, an amount the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation assess­
termed net income on clearing balances. Total cost ment), imputed income taxes, and the targeted
is the sum of operating expenses, imputed costs return on equity.

Federal Reserve Banks 121
Activity in Federal Reserve Priced Services, 2002–2004
Thousands of items
Percent change
Service 2004 2003 2002
2003 to 2004 2002 to 2003
Commercial check ................. 13,904,382 15,805,894 16,586,804 −12.0 −4.7
Funds transfer ..................... 128,270 125,936 117,133 1.9 7.5
Securities transfer ................. 9,208 10,071 8,480 −8.6 18.8
Commercial ACH ................. 6,486,091 5,588,381 4,986,152 16.1 12.1
Noncash .......................... 211 280 333 −24.7 −15.8
Note. Activity in commercial check is the total num­ line; in commercial ACH, the total number of commercial
ber of commercial checks collected, including processed items processed; and in noncash, the number of items on
and fine-sort items; in funds transfer and securities trans­ which fees were assessed.
fer, the number of transactions originated online and off-
away from the use of checks and toward ville. Omaha check processing has been
greater use of electronic payment meth­ consolidated to Des Moines; Richmond
ods.5 Overall, the price index for check to Baltimore; Little Rock to Memphis;
services increased 8.7 percent from and Columbia (South Carolina) to Char­
2003. lotte. Both El Paso and San Antonio
In response to the continuing decline have been consolidated to Dallas, and
in check volume, the Reserve Banks both Milwaukee and Peoria to Chicago.
took further steps in 2004 to reduce Volume from Charleston (West Vir­
check service operating costs by imple­ gina), Louisville, and Indianapolis is
menting a business and operational strat­ now processed in Cincinnati.
egy that will position the service to Of all the checks presented by the
achieve its financial and payment sys­ Reserve Banks to paying banks,
tem objectives over the long term. The 23.1 percent (approximately 3.2 bil­
strategy will reduce operating costs lion checks) were presented electroni­
through a combination of measures: cally, compared with 22.7 percent in
streamlining management structures, 2003. The Banks captured images of
reducing staff, decreasing the number of 10.4 percent of the checks they col­
check-processing locations, and increas­ lected, an increase from 9.3 percent in
ing processing capacity at some 2003.
locations. In 2004, check-processing The Reserve Banks also expanded the
facilities were closed at some locations services available to depository institu­
and the work moved to others. Checks tions through the web during the year.
that would have been processed in These investments are expected to
Miami are now processed in Jackson­ increase operating efficiency and the
Reserve Banks’ ability to offer addi­
tional services to depository institutions.
5. The Federal Reserve System’s recent retail
payments research suggests that the number of
checks written in the United States has been
declining since the mid-1990s. See Federal Commercial Automated
Reserve System, ‘‘The 2004 Federal Reserve
Clearinghouse Services
Payments Study: Analysis of Noncash Pay­
ments Trends in the United States, 2000–2003’’
Reserve Bank operating expenses and
(December 2004). (www.frbservices.org/Retail/
pdf/2004PaymentResearchReport.pdf) imputed costs for commercial automated

122 91st Annual Report, 2004
clearinghouse (ACH) services totaled eastern time. The impetus for the expan­
$64.0 million in 2004. Revenue from sion of operating hours was industry
ACH operations totaled $71.1 million requests to achieve greater overlap of
and other income totaled $4.0 million, wholesale payments system operating
resulting in net income of $11.1 million. hours in U.S. and Asia–Pacific markets.
The Banks processed 6.5 billion
commercial ACH transactions (worth National Settlement Service
$12.5 trillion), an increase of 16.1 per­
Private clearing arrangements that
cent from 2003. Overall, the price index
exchange and settle transactions may
for ACH services decreased 10.2 per­
use the Reserve Banks’ National Settle­
cent from 2003.
ment Service to settle their transactions.
In 2004, the Reserve Banks began
This service is provided to approxi­
offering international ACH funds trans­
mately seventy local and national pri­
fer service from the United States to
vate arrangements, primarily check
Austria, Canada, Germany, Mexico, and
clearinghouse associations but also other
the Netherlands. The Banks also offer
types of arrangements. In 2004, the
service to Switzerland and the United
Reserve Banks processed slightly fewer
Kingdom.
than 435,000 settlement entries for these
arrangements.
Fedwire Funds and
National Settlement Services
Fedwire Securities Service
Reserve Bank operating expenses and
The Fedwire Securities Service allows
imputed costs for the Fedwire Funds
participants to electronically transfer
and National Settlement Services totaled
securities issued by the U.S. Trea­
$50.7 million in 2004. Revenue from
sury, federal government agencies,
these operations totaled $54.1 mil­
government-sponsored enterprises, and
lion, and other income amounted to
certain international organizations to
$3.0 million, resulting in net income of
other participants in the United States.6
$6.5 million.
Reserve Bank operating expenses and
imputed costs for providing this service
Fedwire Funds Service
totaled $16.9 million in 2004. Revenue
The Fedwire Funds Service allows par­ from the service totaled $19.3 mil­
ticipants to draw on their reserve or lion, and other income totaled $1.1 mil­
clearing balances at the Reserve Banks lion, resulting in net income of $3.4 mil­
and transfer funds to other institutions lion. Approximately 9.2 million trans­
that maintain accounts at the Banks. In fers of Treasury and other securities
2004, the number of Fedwire funds
transfers originated by depository insti­
tutions increased 1.9 percent from 2003, 6. The expenses, revenues, and volumes
reported here are for transfers of securities issued
to approximately 128.3 million. In May,
by federal government agencies, government-
the Banks expanded the operating hours sponsored enterprises, and international institu­
for the online service. The service is tions. The Treasury Department assesses fees on
now open three and one-half hours depository institutions for some of the transfer,
account maintenance, and settlement services for
earlier—at 9:00 p.m. eastern time the
U.S. Treasury securities provided by the Reserve
preceding calendar day rather than the
Banks. For details, see the section ‘‘Debt Ser­
previous opening time of 12:30 a.m. vices’’ later in this chapter.

Federal Reserve Banks 123
were processed by the service during The Federal Reserve includes the cost
the year, a decrease of 8.6 percent of or income from float associated with
from 2003. In 2004, the fee for securi­ priced services as part of the fees for
ties transfers decreased from $0.40 to those services.
$0.32, and the surcharge for offline
transfers increased from $25 to $28.
Developments in
Currency and Coin
Noncash Collection Service
The Reserve Banks received 37.5 billion
The Reserve Banks provide a service to Federal Reserve notes from circulation
collect and process municipal bearer in 2004, a 5.1 percent increase from
bonds and coupons issued by state and 2003, and made payments of 37.9 bil­
local governments (referred to as ‘‘non­ lion notes into circulation, a 3.6 percent
cash’’ items). The service, which is cen­ increase from 2003. They received
tralized at one Federal Reserve office, 55.7 billion coins from circulation in
processed slightly less than 211,000 2004, a 15.6 percent increase from 2003,
noncash transactions in 2004, represent­ and made payments of 67.5 billion coins
ing a 24.7 percent decline in volume into circulation, a 9.8 percent increase
from 2003. Operating expenses and from 2003.8
imputed costs for noncash operations In October 2004, the Reserve Banks
totaled $1.4 million in 2004, and reve­ began issuing the redesigned $50 Fed­
nue and other income totaled $1.9 mil­ eral Reserve note, which has enhanced
lion, resulting in net income of $0.5 mil­ security features and subtle background
lion. The fee for return items increased colors. In connection with issuance of
from $20 to $35. the new notes, the Federal Reserve and
In October, the Board requested com­ the Bureau of Engraving and Printing
ment on a proposal to withdraw from conducted a public education campaign
the noncash collection service at year­ to raise awareness of the note’s design
end 2005. The volume of coupons and and security features.
bonds presented for collection is declin­ In 2003, the Board requested com­
ing, a result of a continuing decline in ments on a proposed cash-recirculation
the number of physical municipal secu­ policy intended to change its cash-
rities outstanding since passage of the services policy to reduce overuse of
Tax Equity and Fiscal Responsibility Reserve Bank cash-processing services.
Act of 1982, which removed tax advan­ Currently, many depository institutions
tages for investors and effectively led to order currency late in the week to meet
the end of issuance of bearer municipal temporary, cyclical demand and then
securities. return the currency to a Federal Reserve
facility several days later to minimize
their holdings of vault cash, which does
Float
not earn interest. The process repeats
The Federal Reserve had daily average each week, and the Federal Reserve
credit float of $76.4 million in 2004, facility receiving the returned currency
compared with $43.0 million in 2003.7 must process it each time. To test the
effectiveness of a program that supports
7. Credit float occurs when the Reserve Banks
receive settlement for items prior to providing 8. Percentages reflect restatements of previ­
credit to the depositing institution. ously reported data.

124 91st Annual Report, 2004
the proposed cash-recirculation policy, The cost of providing services to other
the Banks established eleven custodial entities was $28.4 million, compared
inventory sites in 2004. Custodial inven­ with $35.3 million in 2003. In 2004, as
tories allow depository institutions to in 2003, the Treasury and other entities
transfer a portion of their cash holdings reimbursed the Reserve Banks for the
to the books of a Reserve Bank and are costs of providing these services.
intended to encourage depository insti­ The most significant development in
tutions to recirculate fit currency rather relation to the fiscal agency service in
than return it to the Federal Reserve for 2004 was the Reserve Banks’ consoli­
processing. The program will operate dation of operations that support the
for six months, after which the Federal Treasury’s retail securities programs,
Reserve will evaluate the program’s through which retail investors purchase
effectiveness in promoting currency and hold marketable Treasury securities
recirculation. and savings bonds. As the Treasury
In 2004, the Federal Reserve also replaced paper processes in retail securi­
established a group to study the poten­ ties with more-efficient electronic pro­
tial effects of the proposed cash- cesses, fewer operations sites were
recirculation policy on the quality of needed. In December 2003, the Trea­
currency in circulation. The group is sury directed the Banks to consolidate
working with the vending industry and their retail securities operations from
manufacturers of currency-handling seven sites to two. The consolidation
equipment to evaluate the importance of has proceeded ahead of schedule and
currency quality for their industries. should be completed late in 2005. The
Banks expect that in 2006, annual oper­
ating costs for the retail securities opera­
Developments in tions will decline significantly because
Fiscal Agency and of lower personnel costs.
Government Depository Services
Debt Services
As fiscal agents and depositories for the
federal government, the Federal Reserve The Reserve Banks auction, provide
Banks provide services related to the safekeeping for, and transfer market­
federal debt, help the Treasury collect able Treasury securities. Reserve Bank
funds owed to the government, process operating expenses for these activi­
electronic and check payments for the ties totaled $23.4 million in 2004, an
Treasury, maintain the Treasury’s bank 8.3 percent increase from 2003. The
account, and invest excess Treasury bal­ Banks processed more than 156,000 ten­
ances. The Reserve Banks also provide ders for Treasury securities, compared
limited fiscal agency and depository ser­ with 140,000 in 2003, and handled
vices to other entities. 2 million reinvestment requests, com­
The total cost of providing fiscal pared with 2.2 million in 2003. The
agency and depository services to the Banks originated 10.7 million trans­
Treasury and other entities in 2004 fers of Treasury securities in 2004, a
amounted to $369.8 million, compared 13.6 percent increase from 2003. As of
with $327.0 million in 2003 (table). December 31, 2004, the Reserve Banks’
Treasury-related costs were $341.4 mil­ Fedwire Securities Service maintained
lion in 2004, compared with $291.7 mil­ custody of $3.9 trillion (par value) of
lion in 2003, an increase of 17 percent. Treasury securities.

Federal Reserve Banks 125
Expenses of the Federal Reserve Banks for Fiscal Agency and Depository Services,
2002–2004
Thousands of dollars
Agency and service 2004 2003 2002
Department of the Treasury
Bureau of the Public Debt
Treasury retail securities
Savings bonds ...................................... 72,385.1 66,403.7 68,888.3
TreasuryDirect and Treasury coupons ................ 30,872.7 33,013.5 33,953.6
Treasury securities safekeeping and transfer ............. 6,267.0 4,836.3 8,830.1
Treasury auction ....................................... 17,159.5 16,802.6 14,597.6
Computer infrastructure development and support ....... 5,935.1 7,836.7 2,349.6
Other services ......................................... 1,709.8 1,460.7 2,385.8
Total ............................................. 134,329.1 130,353.4 131,005.0
Financial Management Service
Payment services
Government check processing ........................ 24,245.4 25,624.7 30,284.4
Automated clearinghouse ............................ 5,352.9 6,253.9 6,280.0
Fedwire funds transfers .............................. 111.6 187.3 201.4
Other payment-related services ....................... 33,646.9 23,630.8 20,172.1
Collection services
Tax and other revenue collections .................... 34,248.4 29,782.9 26,361.3
Other collection-related services ...................... 12,922.8 12,532.6 10,296.4
Cash management services ............................. 21,835.8 18,227.8 17,310.8
Computer infrastructure development and support ....... 52,673.3 24,575.3 7,592.6
Other services ......................................... 6,931.6 6,666.2 5,415.8
Total ............................................. 191,968.6 147,481.5 123,914.7
Other Treasury
Total .................................................. 15,106.1 13,913.5 14,471.2
Total, Treasury ................................... 341,403.7 291,748.5 269,390.9
Other Federal Agencies
Department of Agriculture
Food coupons ....................................... 4,519.0 7,791.4 10,240.8
U.S. Postal Service
Postal money orders ................................. 7,774.6 10,959.5 12,381.6
Other agencies
Other services ....................................... 16,104.0 16,508.2 16,494.1
Total, other agencies ............................ 28,397.5 35,259.2 39,116.5
Total reimbursable expenses ............................ 369,801.2 327,007.7 308,507.4
In support of the Treasury’s retail As of December 31, 2004, Treasury-
securities programs, the Reserve Banks Direct held $62.2 billion (par value) of
operate TreasuryDirect, a program that marketable Treasury securities.
allows retail investors to purchase and TreasuryDirect customers may sell
hold Treasury securities directly with their securities for a fee through Sell
the Treasury instead of through a broker. Direct, a program operated by one of
As the program was designed for inves­ the Reserve Banks. That Bank sold
tors who plan to hold their securities approximately 15,000 securities worth
to maturity, TreasuryDirect provides $673.3 million in 2004, compared with
custody services only. Reserve Bank more than 14,000 securities worth
operating expenses for TreasuryDirect $671.6 million in 2003. It collected
totaled $30.9 million in 2004, compared approximately $504,000 in fees on
with $33.0 million in 2003. In 2004, behalf of the Treasury, an increase of
investors purchased 13.7 billion of Trea­ 2.6 percent from the more than $491,000
sury securities through TreasuryDirect. in fees collected in 2003.

126 91st Annual Report, 2004
Reserve Bank operating expenses for sury’s stored value card program, which
issuing, servicing, and redeeming sav­ provides salary and allowance payments
ings bonds totaled $72.4 million in to military personnel, via a smart card,
2004, an increase of 9 percent from for use at military bases. In 2004, the
2003. The Banks printed and mailed Banks worked with the Treasury on
more than 35 million savings bonds, an plans for a web-based application to
11.4 percent decrease from 2003. They allow federal agencies and vendors to
issued more than 4.2 million Series I electronically exchange purchase orders
(inflation indexed) bonds and 25.4 mil­ and invoices and initiate ACH pay­
lion Series EE bonds. Reissued or ments. The operating costs for these
exchanged bonds accounted for the three programs totaled $15.4 million in
remaining bonds printed. The Banks 2004, compared with $14.3 million in
processed about 601,000 redemption, 2003.
reissue, and exchange transactions, a
5.8 percent increase from 2003.
Collection Services
The Reserve Banks support several
Payments Services
Treasury programs to collect funds
The Reserve Banks process both elec­ owed the government. Reserve Bank
tronic and check payments for the Trea­ operating expenses related to these pro­
sury. Reserve Bank operating expenses grams totaled $47.2 million in 2004,
for processing government payments compared with $42.3 million in 2003.
totaled $63.4 million in 2004, compared The Banks operate the Federal Reserve
with $55.7 million in 2003. The Banks Electronic Tax Application (FR-ETA) as
processed 940 million ACH payments an adjunct to the Treasury’s Electronic
for the Treasury, an increase of 3.0 per­ Federal Tax Payment System (EFTPS).
cent from 2003, and 876,000 Fedwire EFTPS allows businesses and individual
funds transfers, a decrease of 11.5 per­ taxpayers to pay their taxes electroni­
cent from 2003 (the latter percentage cally. Because EFTPS uses the auto­
reflects a restatement of previously mated clearinghouse to collect funds,
reported data). They also processed tax payments must be scheduled at least
234.1 million paper government checks, one day in advance. Some business tax­
a decline of 12.3 percent from 2003. In payers, however, do not know their tax
addition, the Banks issued more than liability until the tax due date. FR-ETA,
278,000 fiscal agency checks, a decrease for wire payments, allows these taxpay­
of 10.4 percent from 2003. ers to use EFTPS by providing a same-
In addition to processing payments, day electronic federal tax payment alter­
the Reserve Banks operate programs to native. FR-ETA collected $344.8 billion
help the Treasury increase the use of for the Treasury in 2004, compared with
electronic payments. They operate a $275.8 billion in 2003.
program that enables recipients of fed­ The Reserve Banks also operate
eral grants to request payments using Pay.gov, a Treasury program that allows
the Internet. This application, the Auto­ members of the public to make pay­
mated Standard Application for Pay­ ments to the federal government over
ment, processed $404.7 billion in Fed- the Internet. They also operate the Trea­
wire funds transfers and ACH payments sury’s Paper Check Conversion and
in 2004, compared with $384.2 billion Electronic Check Processing programs,
in 2003. The Banks also operate Trea­ whereby checks written to government

Federal Reserve Banks 127
agencies are converted at the point of FedLine Advantage, the next-generation
sale or at lockbox locations into auto­ platform for providing PC-based elec­
mated clearinghouse transactions. In tronic access to Federal Reserve finan­
2004, the Reserve Banks originated cial services. The new platform uses
more than 1.9 million ACH transactions web technology to provide financial
through these programs, a 58.3 percent institutions with more-efficient access
increase from the 1.2 million originated to such payments services as the
in 2003. Fedwire Funds Service, the Fedwire
Securities Service, and FedACH Ser­
Cash Management Services vices. To complement the transition
to web-based electronic access, the
The Treasury maintains its bank account
Reserve Banks completed consolidation
at the Reserve Banks and invests the
of the electronic-access customer sup­
funds it does not need for making cur­
port function to two offices. The con­
rent payments with qualified depository
solidation will improve the efficiency
institutions through the Treasury Tax
and consistency of customer support.
and Loan (TT&L) program, which the
Reserve Banks operate. Reserve Bank
operating expenses related to this pro­ Information Technology
gram totaled $21.8 million in 2004,
In 2004, the Federal Reserve Banks
compared with $18.2 million in 2003.
completed an initiative to standardize
The investments either are callable on
desktop hardware and software across
demand or are for a set term. In 2004,
Banks. In addition to reducing costs
the Reserve Banks placed a total of
over the long term, the standardization
$17.1 billion in immediately callable
is expected to facilitate interoperability,
investments. The rate for term invest­
increase productivity, and improve the
ments is set at Term Investment Option
Federal Reserve’s ability to respond to
(TIO) auctions; the Reserve Banks
cyber security threats. Projects are now
held 45 TIO auctions in 2004, placing
under way to standardize local area net­
$309 billion in term investments, com­
work components and telephone private
pared with 12 auctions placing $66 bil­
branch exchange systems and to imple­
lion in 2003. In 2004, the Treasury’s
ment reduced-cost wide area network
investment income, which comes from
telecommunications services.
the TT&L program, was $87 million.
In partnership with the agencies that
make up the Financial and Banking
Services Provided to Other Entities
Information Infrastructure Committee,
The Reserve Banks provide fiscal the Federal Reserve continued in 2004
agency and depository services to other to sponsor clearing and settlement utili­
domestic and international entities when ties, key financial institutions, and key
required to do so by the Secretary of the market participants in the national
Treasury or when required or permitted security/emergency preparedness pro­
to do so by federal statute. The majority grams offered by the Department of
of the work is securities-related. Homeland Security’s National Commu­
nications System, which coordinates the
preparedness of critical telecommunica­
Electronic Access
tions services to meet natural disasters
In November 2004, the Reserve Banks and national emergencies. During the
announced the general availability of year, the Federal Reserve participated in

128 91st Annual Report, 2004
the President’s National Security Tele­ to the Bank’s board of directors and to
communications Advisory Committee the Board of Governors.
Financial Services Task Force, which in The firm engaged for the audits of
April 2004 released a report on network the individual and combined financial
resilience in support of critical finan­ statements of the Reserve Banks for
cial services. The Reserve Banks are 2004 was PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP
currently working with telecommunica­ (PwC). Fees for these services totaled
tions vendors and other government $2.0 million. To ensure auditor indepen­
agencies to identify policies that would dence, the Board requires that PwC be
improve the resilience of the telecom­ independent in all matters relating to the
munications infrastructure for critical audit. Specifically, PwC may not per­
financial services functions. form services for the Reserve Banks or
others that would place it in a position
of auditing its own work, making man­
Examinations of the
agement decisions on behalf of the
Federal Reserve Banks
Reserve Banks, or in any other way
Section 21 of the Federal Reserve Act impairing its audit independence. In
requires the Board of Governors to order 2004 the Reserve Banks did not engage
an examination of each Federal Reserve PwC for non-audit services other than a
Bank at least once a year. The Board training session at one Reserve Bank
engages a public accounting firm to per­ that was obtained at a rate available to
form an annual audit of the combined the general public.
financial statements of the Reserve The Board’s annual examination of
Banks (see the section ‘‘Federal Reserve the Reserve Banks includes a wide
Banks Combined Financial State­ range of off-site and on-site oversight
ments’’). The public accounting firm activities conducted by the Division of
also audits the annual financial state­ Reserve Bank Operations and Payment
ments of each of the twelve Banks. The Systems. Division personnel monitor
Reserve Banks use the framework estab­ the activities of each Reserve Bank on
lished by the Committee of Sponsoring an ongoing basis and conduct on-site
Organizations of the Treadway Com­ reviews based on the division’s risk-
mission (COSO) in assessing their inter­ assessment methodology. The 2004
nal controls over financial reporting, examinations also included assessing the
including the safeguarding of assets. efficiency and effectiveness of the inter­
In 2004, the Reserve Banks enhanced nal audit function. To assess compliance
their assessments under the COSO with the policies established by the Fed­
framework, strengthening the key con­ eral Reserve’s Federal Open Market
trol assertion process, consistent with Committee (FOMC), the division also
the requirements of the Sarbanes–Oxley reviews the accounts and holdings of
Act of 2002. Within this framework, the System Open Market Account at
management of each Reserve Bank pro­ the Federal Reserve Bank of New York
vides an assertion letter to its board of and the foreign currency operations
directors annually confirming adher­ conducted by that Bank. In addition,
ence to COSO standards, and a public PwC audits the schedule of partici­
accounting firm certifies management’s pated asset and liability accounts and
assertion and issues an attestation report the related schedule of participated

Federal Reserve Banks 129
Income, Expenses, and Distribution of Net Earnings
of the Federal Reserve Banks, 2004 and 2003
Millions of dollars
Item 2004 2003
Current income ........................................................ 23,540 23,793
Current expenses ...................................................... 2,239 2,463
Operating expenses1 ................................................. 2,123 2,342
Earnings credits granted ............................................. 116 121
Current net income .................................................... 21,301 21,330
Net additions to (deductions from, − ) current net income ............... 918 2,481
Assessments by the Board of Governors ................................ 776 805
For expenditures of Board ........................................... 272 297
For cost of currency ................................................. 504 508
Net income before payments to Treasury ............................... 21,443 23,006
Dividends paid ........................................................ 582 518
Transferred to surplus .................................................. 2,783 467
Payments to Treasury2 ................................................. 18,078 22,022
1. Includes a net periodic pension credit of $37 million 2. Interest on Federal Reserve notes.
in 2004 and net periodic pension costs of $58 million in
2003.
income accounts at year-end. The exchange rates. Statutory dividends paid
FOMC receives the external audit to member banks totaled $582 million,
reports and the report on the division’s $64 million more than in 2003; the
examination. increase reflects an increase in the capi­
tal and surplus of member banks and a
consequent increase in the paid-in capi­
Income and Expenses
tal stock of the Reserve Banks.
The accompanying table summarizes the Payments to the U.S. Treasury in the
income, expenses, and distributions of form of interest on Federal Reserve
net earnings of the Federal Reserve notes totaled $18,078 million in 2004,
Banks for 2003 and 2004. down from $22,022 million in 2003; the
Income in 2004 was $23,540 million, payments equal net income after the
compared with $23,793 million in 2003. deduction of dividends paid and of the
Expenses totaled $3,015 million ($2,123 amount necessary to bring the surplus of
million in operating expenses, $116 mil­ the Reserve Banks to the level of capital
lion in earnings credits granted to paid in.
depository institutions, $272 million in In the ‘‘Statistical Tables’’ section of
assessments for expenditures by the this volume, table 5 details the income
Board of Governors, and $504 million and expenses of each Reserve Bank for
for the cost of new currency). Revenue 2004 and table 6 shows a condensed
from priced services was $866 million. statement for each Bank for the years
The profit and loss account showed a 1914 through 2004. A detailed account
net profit of $918 million. The profit of the assessments and expenditures of
was due primarily to unrealized gains on the Board of Governors appears in the
assets denominated in foreign curren­ section ‘‘Board of Governors Financial
cies revalued to reflect current market Statements.’’

130 91st Annual Report, 2004
Securities and Loans of the Federal Reserve Banks, 2002–2004
Millions of dollars except as noted
U.S.
Item and year Total government Loans 2
securities1
Average daily holdings 3
2002 ....................................... 621,834 621,721 113
2003 ....................................... 683,438 683,294 144
2004 ....................................... 719,647 719,494 153
Earnings4
2002 ....................................... 25,527 25,525 2
2003 ....................................... 22,598 22,597 1
2004 ....................................... 22,347 22,344 3
Average interest rate (percent)
2002 ....................................... 4.11 4.11 1.94
2003 ....................................... 3.31 3.31 1.00
2004 ....................................... 3.11 3.11 1.74
1. Includes federal agency obligations. 4. Earnings have not been netted with the inter­
2. Does not include indebtedness assumed by the Fed­ est expense on securities sold under agreements to
eral Deposit Insurance Corporation. repurchase.
3. Based on holdings at opening of business.
Holdings of Securities and Loans Reserve Bank’s Houston Branch and the
Chicago Bank’s Detroit Branch.
The Federal Reserve Banks’ average
Security enhancement programs
daily holdings of securities and loans
prompted by the events of Septem­
during 2004 amounted to $719,647 mil­
ber 11, 2001, continue at several facili­
lion, an increase of $36,209 million
ties. One such project is an ongoing
from 2003 (table). Holdings of U.S. gov­
external perimeter security improve­
ernment securities increased $36,200
ment project at the Boston Bank that
million, and holdings of loans increased
involves restoration of the Bank’s prop­
$9 million. The average rate of interest
erty after recently completed construc­
earned on the Reserve Banks’ holdings
tion of the Central Artery, an under­
of government securities declined to
ground roadway.
3.11 percent, from 3.31 percent in 2003,
The Kansas City Bank purchased
and the average rate of interest earned
property and retained design and con­
on loans increased to 1.74 percent, from
struction consultants for its new head­
1.00 percent.
quarters building project. The Board
approved the project’s schematic design,
Volume of Operations
and work continues on the final design.
Table 8 in the ‘‘Statistical Tables’’ sec­ The Board approved the St. Louis
tion shows the volume of operations in Bank’s purchase of a building to be
the principal departments of the Fed­ renovated as a business-continuity relo­
eral Reserve Banks for the years 2001 cation facility.
through 2004. The Richmond Bank purchased and
renovated a building as a relocation site
for critical staff. Design work on addi­
Federal Reserve Bank Premises
tional security improvements continued.
In 2004, construction continued on the The Dallas Bank continues to pursue
new buildings for the Dallas Federal the purchase of property behind its head­

Federal Reserve Banks 131
quarters building for the construction of The multiyear renovation program
a remote vehicle screening and shipping/ continued at the New York Bank’s head­
receiving facility. quarters building.
As part of its long-term facility rede­ Several Banks continue to imple­
velopment program, the St. Louis Bank ment facility renovation projects to
purchased and renovated a parking accommodate the consolidation of check
garage for staff parking and a warehouse activities.
for remote screening of deliveries. The Agreements were reached in 2004 to
Bank retained design consultants for sell the buildings housing the New York
expansion of the Bank’s headquarters Bank’s Buffalo Branch, the St. Louis
building, and design work began. Bank’s Louisville Branch, and the Chi­
The San Francisco Bank retained cago Bank’s Milwaukee facility. Ad­
design and construction consultants for ministration activities for the Buffalo
the new Seattle Branch building and and Louisville Branches will be moved
finalized an agreement to purchase prop­ to leased space.
erty for the new building. Design work
has begun.

132 91st Annual Report, 2004
Pro Forma Financial Statements for Federal Reserve Priced Services
Pro Forma Balance Sheet for Priced Services, December 31, 2004 and 2003
Millions of dollars
Item 2004 2003
Short-term assets (Note 1)
Imputed reserve requirements
on clearing balances ............ 1,115.7 1,296.4
Imputed investments ................. 9,691.9 11,332.5
Receivables ......................... 75.8 77.1
Materials and supplies ............... 1.9 2.3
Prepaid expenses .................... 31.8 35.6
Items in process of collection ........ 6,107.1 5,271.9
Total short-term assets ........ 17,024.1 18,015.8
Long-term assets (Note 2)
Premises ............................ 471.8 494.6
Furniture and equipment ............. 152.8 179.4
Leases, leasehold improvements, and
long-term prepayments .......... 107.9 103.2
Prepaid pension costs ................ 795.4 787.9
Total long-term assets ......... 1,528.0 1,565.1
Total assets .......................... 18,552.1 19,580.9
Short-term liabilities
Clearing balances and balances
arising from early credit
of uncollected items ............. 11,909.5 11,788.1
Deferred-availability items ........... 5,354.3 6,448.3
Short-term debt ...................... .0 .0
Short-term payables .................. 92.2 78.1
Total short-term liabilities ..... 17,355.9 18,314.4
Long-term liabilities
Long-term debt ...................... .0 .0
Postretirement/postemployment
benefits obligation .............. 268.6 287.5
Total long-term liabilities ..... 268.6 287.5
Total liabilities ...................... 17,624.5 18,601.9
Equity .............................. 927.6 979.0
Total liabilities and equity (Note 3) . . . 18,552.1 19,580.9
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of The accompanying notes are an integral part of these
rounding. pro forma priced services financial statements.

Federal Reserve Banks 133
Pro Forma Income Statement for Federal Reserve Priced Services, 2004 and 2003
Millions of dollars
Item 2004 2003
Revenue from services provided
to depository institutions (Note 4) ...... 865.9 886.9
Operating expenses (Note 5) ................ 800.6 941.6
Income from operations .................... 65.3 −54.7
Imputed costs (Note 6)
Interest on float .......................... −.1 −.7
Interest on debt .......................... .0 .0
Sales taxes .............................. 11.6 12.1
FDIC insurance .......................... .0 11.4 .0 11.4
Income from operations after
imputed costs ......................... 53.8 −66.1
Other income and expenses (Note 7)
Investment income ....................... 156.8 108.0
Earnings credits ......................... −108.1 48.7 −113.2 −5.2
Income before income taxes ................ 102.5 −71.3
Imputed income taxes (Note 6) .............. 30.6 −21.7
Net income ................................ 72.0 −49.6
Memo: Targeted return on equity (Note 6) . . . 112.4 104.7
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of The accompanying notes are an integral part of these
rounding. pro forma priced services financial statements.
Pro Forma Income Statement for Federal Reserve Priced Services, by Service, 2004
Millions of dollars
Com­
Com­
mercial Fedwire Fedwire Noncash
Item Total mercial
check funds securities services
ACH
collection
Revenue from services
(Note 4) .......................... 865.9 719.7 54.1 19.3 71.1 1.8
Operating expenses
(Note 5) .......................... 800.6 678.5 47.2 15.2 58.6 1.2
Income from operations ................ 65.3 41.2 6.9 4.1 12.5 .6
Imputed costs (Note 6) ................. 11.4 9.7 .7 .3 .7 .0
Income from operations
after imputed costs ................ 53.8 31.4 6.2 3.8 11.8 .6
Other income and expenses,
net (Note 7) ...................... 48.7 40.5 3.0 1.1 4.0 .1
Income before income taxes ............ 102.5 71.9 9.2 4.9 15.8 .7
Imputed income taxes
(Note 6) .......................... 30.6 21.4 2.8 1.4 4.7 .2
Net income ............................ 72.0 50.5 6.5 3.4 11.1 .5
Memo: Targeted return on
equity (Note 6) ................... 112.4 93.6 6.8 2.9 8.9 .2
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of The accompanying notes are an integral part of these
rounding. pro forma priced services financial statements.

134 91st Annual Report, 2004
FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS
Notes to Pro Forma Financial Statements for Priced Services
(1) Short-Term Assets Banks and deposit balances arising from float. Other
long-term liabilities consist of accrued postemployment
The imputed reserve requirement on clearing balances
and postretirement benefits costs and obligations on capi­
held at Reserve Banks by depository institutions reflects a
tal leases.
treatment comparable to that of compensating balances
Equity is imputed at 5 percent of total assets based on
held at correspondent banks by respondent institutions.
the Federal Deposit Insurance Corporation’s definition of
The reserve requirement imposed on respondent balances
a well-capitalized institution for deposit insurance pre­
must be held as vault cash or as non-earning balances
mium purposes.
maintained at a Reserve Bank; thus, a portion of priced
services clearing balances held with the Federal Reserve
is shown as required reserves on the asset side of the (4) Revenue
balance sheet. Another portion of the clearing balances Revenue represents charges to depository institutions for
is used to finance short-term and long-term assets. The priced services and is realized from each institution
remainder of clearing balances is assumed to be invested through one of two methods: direct charges to an institu­
in a portfolio of investments, shown as imputed invest­ tion’s account or charges against its accumulated earn­
ments. For 2003, imputed investments were assumed to ings credits.
be three-month Treasury bills.
Receivables are (1) amounts due the Reserve Banks for
(5) Operating Expenses
priced services and (2) the share of suspense-account and
difference-account balances related to priced services. Operating expenses consist of the direct, indirect, and
Materials and supplies are the inventory value of short- other general administrative expenses of the Reserve
term assets. Banks for priced services plus the expenses for staff
Prepaid expenses include salary advances and travel members of the Board of Governors working directly on
advances for priced-service personnel. the development of priced services. The expenses for
Items in process of collection is gross Federal Reserve Board staff members were $7.6 million in 2004 and
cash items in process of collection (CIPC) stated on a $6.4 million in 2003. The credit to expenses under
basis comparable to that of a commercial bank. It reflects SFAS 87 (see note 2) is reflected in operating expenses.
adjustments for intra-System items that would otherwise The income statement by service reflects revenue,
be double-counted on a consolidated Federal Reserve operating expenses, and imputed costs. Certain corporate
balance sheet; adjustments for items associated with non- overhead costs not closely related to any particular priced
priced items, such as those collected for government service are allocated to priced services in total based on
agencies; and adjustments for items associated with an expense-ratio method, but are allocated among priced
providing fixed availability or credit before items are services based on management decision. Corporate over­
received and processed. Among the costs to be recovered head was allocated among the priced services during
under the Monetary Control Act is the cost of float, or net 2004 and 2003 as follows (in millions):
CIPC during the period (the difference between gross
CIPC and deferred-availability items, which is the portion 2004 2003
of gross CIPC that involves a financing cost), valued at
the federal funds rate. Check ..................... 33.5 38.9
ACH ...................... 3.4 3.3
(2) Long-Term Assets Fedwire funds .............. 2.5 2.1
Fedwire securities .......... 1.3 1.1
Consists of long-term assets used solely in priced ser­ Noncash services ........... .1 .1
vices, the priced-services portion of long-term assets
shared with nonpriced services, and an estimate of the Total ...................... 40.8 45.5*
assets of the Board of Governors used in the development
of priced services. Effective Jan. 1, 1987, the Reserve (6) Imputed Costs
Banks implemented the Financial Accounting Standards
Imputed costs consist of income taxes, return on equity,
Board’s Statement of Financial Accounting Standards
interest on debt, sales taxes, the FDIC assessment, and
No. 87, Employers’ Accounting for Pensions (SFAS 87).
interest on float. Many imputed costs are derived from the
Accordingly, the Reserve Banks recognized a credit to
private-sector adjustment factor (PSAF) model, which
expenses of $7.5 million in 2004 and expenses of
uses bank holding companies as the proxy for a private-
$21.3 million in 2003 and a corresponding increase and
sector firm. The cost of debt and the effective tax rate
decrease in this asset account.
from the PSAF model are used to impute debt and income
taxes. The after-tax rate of return on equity is used to
(3) Liabilities and Equity
impute the profit that would have been earned had the
Under the matched-book capital structure for assets, services been provided by a private-sector firm.
short-term assets are financed with short-term payables Interest is imputed on the debt assumed necessary to
and clearing balances. Long-term assets are financed with finance priced-service assets; however, no debt was
long-term liabilities and clearing balances. As a result,
no short-or long-term debt is imputed. Other short-term
liabilities include clearing balances maintained at Reserve * Restatement of previously reported total.

Federal Reserve Banks 135
imputed in 2004 or 2003. The sales taxes and FDIC balances; the increase is produced by a deduction for float
assessment that the Federal Reserve would have paid had for cash items in process of collection, which reduces
been a private-sector firm are also among the components imputed reserve requirements. The income on clearing
of the PSAF. balances reduces the float to be recovered through other
Interest on float is derived from the value of float to be means. As-of adjustments and direct charges refer to float
recovered, either explicitly or through per-item fees, dur­ that is created by interterritory check transportation and
ing the period. Float costs include costs for checks, book- the observance of non-standard holidays by some deposi­
entry securities, noncash collection, ACH, and funds tory institutions. Such float may be recovered from the
transfers. depository institutions through adjustments to institution
Float cost or income is based on the actual float reserve or clearing balances or by billing institutions
incurred for each priced service. Other imputed costs are directly. Float recovered through direct charges and per-
allocated among priced services according to the ratio of item fees is valued at the federal funds rate; credit float
operating expenses less shipping expenses for each ser­ recovered through per-item fees has been subtracted from
vice to the total expenses for all services less the total the cost base subject to recovery in 2004.
shipping expenses for all services.
The following list shows the daily average recovery of (7) Other Income and Expenses
actual float by the Reserve Banks for 2004 in millions of
Consists of investment income on clearing balances and
dollars:
the cost of earnings credits. Investment income on clear­
Total float −13.5 ing balances for 2004 represents the average coupon-
equivalent yield on three-month Treasury bills plus a
Unrecovered float 19.4
constant spread, based on the return on a portfolio of
Float subject to recovery −33.0 investments. For 2003, the investment income is based on
the yield of the three-month Treasury bill. In both years,
Sources of recovery of float
Income on clearing balances −3.3 thereturnisappliedtothe total clearing balance main­
As-of adjustments −62.8 tained, adjusted for the effect of reserve requirements on
Direct charges 823.4 clearing balances. Expenses for earnings credits granted
Per-item fees −915.9 to depository institutions on their clearing balances are
derived by applying a discounted average coupon-
Unrecovered float includes float generated by services equivalent yield on three-month Treasury bills in 2004
to government agencies and by other central bank ser­ and the average federal funds rate in 2003 to the required
vices. Float recovered through income on clearing bal­ portion of the clearing balances, adjusted for the net effect
ances is the result of the increase in investable clearing of reserve requirements on clearing balances.

137
The Board of Governors and the
Government Performance and Results Act
Under the Government Performance and cusses data validation and verification
Results Act of 1993 (GPRA), federal of results. The performance report indi­
agencies are required to prepare, in cates that the Board generally met its
consultation with Congress and outside explicit goals for 2002–03.
stakeholders, a strategic plan covering a The strategic plan, performance
multiyear period and to submit annual plan, and performance report are avail­
performance plans and performance able on the Board’s public web site
reports. Though not covered by the act, (www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/
the Board of Governors is voluntarily rptcongress/). The Board’s mission
complying with many of the act’s statement and a summary of the goals
mandates. and objectives set forth in the strategic
plan and performance plan are given
below.
Strategic Plan, Performance
Plan, and Performance Report
Mission
The Board’s latest strategic plan in the
The mission of the Board is to foster the
GPRA format, released in August 2004,
stability, integrity, and efficiency of the
covers the period 2004–08. The docu­
nation’s monetary, financial, and pay­
ment articulates the Board’s mission,
ment systems so as to promote optimal
sets forth major goals for the period,
macroeconomic performance.
outlines strategies for achieving those
goals, and discusses the environment
and other factors that could affect their Goals and Objectives
achievement. It also addresses issues
The Federal Reserve has five primary
that cross agency jurisdictional lines,
goals with interrelated and mutually
identifies key quantitative measures of
reinforcing elements:
performance, and discusses performance
evaluation.
The 2004–05 performance plan and Goal
the 2002–03 performance report were
To conduct monetary policy that pro­
posted on the Board’s public web site
motes the achievement of maximum
in August 2004 for access by Con­
sustainable long-term growth and the
gress, the public, and the Government
price stability that fosters that goal.
Accountability Office (formerly the
General Accounting Office). The per­
Objectives
formance plan sets forth specific targets
for some of the performance measures • Stay abreast of recent developments
identified in the strategic plan. The and prospects in the U.S. economy
performance plan also describes the and financial markets, and in those
operational processes and resources abroad, so that monetary policy deci­
needed to meet those targets and dis­ sions will be well informed.

138 91st Annual Report, 2004
• Enhance our knowledge of the struc­ • Promote adherence by domestic and
tural and behavioral relationships in foreign banking organizations super­
the macroeconomic and financial mar­ vised by the Federal Reserve with
kets, and improve the quality of the applicable laws, rules, regulations,
data used to gauge economic per­ policies, and guidelines through a
formance, through developmental comprehensive and effective super­
research activities. vision program.
• Implement monetary policy effec­
tively in rapidly changing economic
Goal
circumstances and in an evolving
financial market structure. To enforce the consumer financial ser­
• Contribute to the development of vices laws fully and fairly, protect and
U.S. international policies and pro­ promote the rights of consumers under
cedures, in cooperation with the U.S. these laws, and encourage banks to meet
Department of the Treasury and other the credit needs of consumers, including
agencies. those in low- and moderate-income
• Promote an understanding of Federal neighborhoods.
Reserve policy among other govern­
ment policy officials and the general Objectives
public.
• Maintain a strong consumer com­
pliance supervision and complaint
Goal investigation program that protects
consumers and reflects the rapidly
To promote a safe, sound, competitive, changing financial services industry.
and accessible banking system and • Implement statutes designed to inform
stable financial markets. and protect consumers that reflect
congressional intent, while achieving
Objectives the proper balance between consumer
protection and industry costs.
• Promote overall financial stability,
• Promote equal access to banking
manage and contain systemic risk, and
services.
ensure that emerging financial prob­
• Promote community development in
lems are identified early and success­
historically underserved areas.
fully resolved before they become
crises.
• Provide a safe, sound, competitive, Goal
and accessible banking system
To provide high-quality professional
through comprehensive and effective
oversight of Reserve Banks
supervision of U.S. banks, bank and
financial holding companies, foreign
Objective
banking organizations, and related
entities. • Produce high-quality assessments of
• Enhance efficiency and effectiveness, Federal Reserve Bank operations,
while remaining sensitive to the projects, and initiatives to help Fed­
burden on supervised institutions, by eral Reserve management foster and
addressing the supervision function’s strengthen sound internal control
procedures, technology, resource allo­ systems and efficient and effective
cation, and staffing issues. performance.

The Board of Governors and the Government Performance and Results Act 139
Goal eral Financial Institutions Examination
Council (FFIEC), the most formal coor­
To foster the integrity, efficiency, and
dination effort has occurred jointly with
accessibility of U.S. payment and settle­
the other depository institution regula­
ment systems.
tory agencies.1 In addition, a coordinat­
ing committee of the depository institu­
Objectives
tion regulatory agencies was created to
• Develop sound, effective policies and address and report on issues of mutual
regulations that foster payment sys­ concern. This interagency working
tem integrity, efficiency, and accessi­ group has been meeting since June 1997
bility. Support and assist the Board to work on issues related to those
in overseeing U.S. dollar payment general goals and objectives that cross
and securities settlement systems agency functions, programs, and activ­
against relevant policy objectives and ities. Whether interagency coordina­
standards. tion was effected through the FFIEC,
• Conduct research and analysis that the coordinating group, or interaction
contributes to policy development and between agency staff, the results have
increases the Board’s and others’ been positive—resulting in improved
understanding of payment system planning for the agencies and substan­
dynamics and risk. tial benefits to the public.
Interagency Coordination
1. The FFIEC consists of the Board of Gover­
Interagency coordination helps focus nors of the Federal Reserve System, the Federal
efforts to eliminate redundancy and Deposit Insurance Corporation, the National
lower costs. As mandated by GPRA and Credit Union Administration, the Office of the
Comptroller of the Currency, and the Office of
in conformance with past practice, the
Thrift Supervision. It was established in 1979 pur­
Board has worked closely with other
suant to title X of the Financial Institutions Regu­
federal agencies to consider plans and latory and Interest Rate Control Act of 1978. The
strategies for programs such as bank FFIEC is a formal interagency body empowered to
supervision that transcend the jurisdic­ prescribe uniform principles, standards, and report
forms for the federal examination of financial
tion of each agency. Coordination of
institutions and to make recommendations to pro­
activities with the U.S. Department of mote uniformity in the supervision of financial
the Treasury and other agencies is evi­ institutions. The FFIEC also provides uniform
dent throughout both the strategic plan examiner training and has taken a lead in develop­
ing standardized software needed for major data
and the performance plan. Given the
collection programs to support the requirements of
degree of similarity in the agencies’
the Home Mortgage Disclosure Act and the Com­
missions and the existence of the Fed­ munity Reinvestment Act.

141
Federal Legislative Proposals
In 2004, the Board of Governors pro­ remove a substantial portion of the
posed and supported a number of legis­ incentive for depository institutions to
lative initiatives that would reduce regu­ engage in avoidance measures, and the
latory burden on financial institutions resulting improvements in efficiency
and benefit consumers without under­ could be expected to eventually be
mining the safety and soundness of passed through to bank borrowers and
insured depository institutions, con­ depositors. When depository institutions
sumer protection, or other important keep their balances at Reserve Banks
public policy principles, such as the as low as possible to minimize the cost
principle of competitive fairness. The of holding these non-interest-bearing
Board recommended that Congress assets, their actions could lead to volatil­
adopt legislation that, among other ity in the federal funds rate. Payment
things, would remove restrictions on the of interest on balances at Reserve Banks
payment of interest on balances held at could help eliminate the need for these
Federal Reserve Banks and on demand actions and help ensure that the Federal
deposits. The Board also recommended Reserve can continue to implement
that Congress adopt legislation that monetary policy using existing pro­
would give the Board greater flexibility cedures. The Board therefore recom­
in setting reserve requirements for mended legislation that explicitly autho­
depository institutions and would ease rizes the payment of interest on balances
restrictions on interstate branching by held by depository institutions at Fed­
banks. These proposals are summarized eral Reserve Banks.
below.
Interest on Demand Deposits
Interest on Depository Institution
The Board restated in 2004 its long-
Balances Held at
standing recommendation that Congress
Federal Reserve Banks
repeal the statutory prohibition against
The Board is obliged by law to establish the payment of interest on demand
reserve requirements for certain depos­ deposits. Since the advent of NOW
its held at depository institutions, for the accounts, the prohibition has effec­
purpose of implementing monetary pol­ tively applied only to checking accounts
icy. Banks, thrift institutions, and credit held by businesses and other for-profit
unions may satisfy their reserve require­ entities. At the time it enacted the
ments by holding vault cash, a balance Depression-era legislation, Congress
in an account at a Federal Reserve Bank, was concerned that large money center
or a combination thereof. Unnecessary banks were bidding deposits away from
restrictions on the payment of interest smaller community banks to make loans
on balances at Reserve Banks could to stock market speculators, depriving
distort market prices and lead to eco­ rural areas of financing. This rationale
nomically wasteful efforts to circumvent no longer appears applicable, as funds
the restrictions. The payment of interest flow freely around the country and
on balances at Reserve Banks would among banks of all sizes to find the

142 91st Annual Report, 2004
most profitable lending opportunities. flexibility to adjust reserve require­
The prohibition against the payment of ments: By law, the ratio of required
interest on demand deposits distorts the reserves to transaction account deposits
pricing of transaction deposits and asso­ above a certain level must be set
ciated bank services; to compete for between 8 percent and 14 percent. The
businesses’ liquid assets, banks have set Board in 2004 supported a legislative
up complicated procedures for implic­ proposal to increase the range within
itly paying interest. The prohibition also which it may set transaction account
distorts the pricing of other bank prod­ reserve requirements, so that it could
ucts. Because banks cannot pay explicit lower the requirements to zero percent
interest on demand deposits, they often if, at some point in the future, the Board
try to attract those deposits by pricing believes it in the best interests of mone­
other bank services below their actual tary policy to do so. Lower reserve
cost. When services are offered below requirement ratios could be possible if
cost, they tend to be overused to the explicit statutory authority to pay inter­
extent that the benefits of consuming est on balances held by depository
them are less than the costs to society of institutions at Federal Reserve Banks
producing them. were to be granted concurrently with
The prohibition against the payment greater flexibility in setting reserve
of interest on demand deposits has also requirements.
led to the introduction of deposit
‘‘sweep’’ services, which permit institu­
Interstate Branching
tions and their customers to avoid the
prohibition’s effects to a large extent. Currently, national and state banks are
Banks spend resources—and charge permitted to expand into additional
fees—for nightly sweeping businesses’ states through the acquisition of another
excess demand deposits into money bank. However, if they do not acquire
market investments. The progress of another bank, they may open a branch in
computer technology has reduced the an additional state only if the host state
cost of sweep services, but the expenses has adopted legislation that expressly
are not trivial, particularly when sys­ permits de novo interstate branching
tems must be upgraded or the diverse (an ‘‘opt-in requirement’’). As of 2004,
systems of merging banks must be inte­ only eighteen states had enacted legis­
grated. From the standpoint of the over­ lation expressly authorizing interstate
all economy, such expenses are a waste branching.
of resources and would be unnecessary The restriction on de novo branching
if the payment of interest on demand is an obstacle to interstate banking, par­
deposits was allowed. ticularly for small banks that seek to
operate across state lines, and may limit
competition and access to banking ser­
Depository Institution
vices. Branch entry into new markets
Reserve Requirements
leads to less concentration in local bank­
The Federal Reserve Act requires that ing markets, which in turn results in
banks and other depository institutions better banking services for households
maintain reserves against certain types and small businesses, lower interest
of deposit accounts, also for the purpose rates on loans, and higher interest rates
of implementing monetary policy. Cur­ on deposits. Allowing banks to operate
rently, the Board is constrained in its freely across state lines also benefits

Federal Legislative Proposals 143
customers as they become more mobile If legislative changes were to permit
and live, work, and operate in multiple ILCs to branch de novo on an interstate
states. The restriction also places banks basis, companies that are not supervised
at a competitive disadvantage in relation or regulated on a consolidated basis
to federal savings associations, which would be able to operate a nationwide
are allowed to open de novo branches in banking institution. Such a result would
any state. be inconsistent with the basis on which
In light of the benefits, the Board the exception for ILCs initially was
recommended that Congress eliminate granted—that the activities of these
the opt-in requirement for interstate institutions were, and would remain,
branching by banks and affirmatively limited in scope. In addition, allowing
authorize national and state banks to companies to own an ILC that operates
establish interstate branches on a de a nationwide banking franchise without
novo basis. Under the Board’s proposal, being subject to the type of consolidated
the establishment and operation of new supervision generally required of the
interstate branches by banks would con­ owners of other insured banks would
tinue to be subject to the other regula­ raise significant safety and soundness
tory provisions and conditions estab­ concerns and place commercial banks
lished by Congress for de novo interstate and their owners at a substantial
branches, including the financial, mana­ competitive disadvantage. Moreover,
gerial, and Community Reinvestment because any type of firm, including a
Act requirements set forth in the Riegle– commercial or retail firm, may own an
Neal Interstate Banking and Branching ILC, permitting these institutions to
Efficiency Act of 1994. branch de novo nationwide has the
A special exception in existing law potential to undermine seriously the
allows companies to own an FDIC- separation of banking and commerce.
insured industrial loan company (ILC) For these reasons, the Board’s pro­
without being subject to the type of con­ posal would require the owners of ILCs
solidated supervision and activities re­ that establish interstate branches to oper­
strictions generally applicable to the ate within the same supervisory regime
owners of insured banks. The number, that generally applies to other compa­
size, and powers of ILCs generally were nies that own insured banks. Impor­
limited when the ILC exception was tantly, the Board’s proposal would not
adopted in 1987; however, the number alter the rights of companies that own
and size of ILCs operating under this ILCs that continue to operate on a lim­
exception recently have increased sig­ ited basis.
nificantly, and some states have granted
ILCs essentially all the powers of com­
mercial banks.

Records

147
Record of Policy Actions
of the Board of Governors
Regulation B Regulation C
Equal Credit Opportunity Home Mortgage Disclosure
[Docket No. R-1186]
Regulation E
Electronic Fund Transfers On December 10, 2004, the Board
revised the tables used to publicly dis­
Regulation M close mortgage lending data in light of
Consumer Leasing revisions to the regulation that require
lending institutions to report additional
Regulation Z data, including loan pricing and other
Truth in Lending data, under the Home Mortgage Dis­
closure Act. The new data reporting
Regulation DD requirements begin January 1, 2004, and
Truth in Savings the revised tables are expected to be
[Docket Nos. R-1168, R-1169, R-1170, implemented in summer or fall 2005.
R-1167, and R-1171]
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
On June 22, 2004, the Board withdrew span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
revisions proposed in December 2003 to ernors Gramlich, Olson, Bernanke, and
Kohn. Absent and not voting: Governor
define more specifically the standard for
Bies.
providing ‘‘clear and conspicuous’’ dis­
closures to consumers and to provide a
Regulation D
more uniform standard for those disclo­
Reserve Requirements of
sures among the regulations. In light
Depository Institutions
of public comment, the Board concluded
[Docket No. R-1213]
that improving the effectiveness of the
disclosures required by each regulation On October 5, 2004, the Board approved
rather than adopting general definitions amendments to reflect the annual index­
and standards would better ensure that ing of the low reserve tranche and of
consumers receive noticeable and under­ the reserve requirement exemption for
standable information about consumer use in 2005 reserve requirement cal­
financial products and services. culations. The amendments increase
the 3 percent low reserve tranche for
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
net transaction accounts to $47.6 mil­
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
lion (from $45.4 million in 2004) and
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
and Kohn. the reserve requirement exemption to
$7 million (from $6.6 million in 2004).
Note. Full texts of the policy actions are avail­
able via the online version of the Annual Report, Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
from the ‘‘Reading Rooms’’ on the Board’s FOIA span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
web page, and on request from the Board’s Free­ ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
dom of Information Office. and Kohn.

148 91st Annual Report, 2004
Regulation H regulatory agencies, approved inter­
Membership of agency amendments to implement pro­
State Banking Institutions in the visions of the Fair and Accurate Credit
Federal Reserve System Transactions Act that require financial
institutions to adopt measures for prop­
Regulation Y erly disposing of consumer information
Bank Holding Companies and derived from consumer reports. The
Change in Bank Control amendments are effective July 1, 2005.
[Docket No. R-1162]
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
On July 19, 2004, the Board, acting with span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
the other federal bank and thrift regu­
and Kohn.
latory agencies, approved interagency
amendments to provide for the risk-
based capital treatment of asset-backed Regulation J
commercial paper program assets that Collection of Checks
have been consolidated in accordance and Other Items by
with Financial Accounting Standards Federal Reserve Banks and
Board Interpretation No. 46, as revised Funds Transfers through Fedwire
(FIN 46-R). The amendments are effec­
[Docket No. R-1202]
tive September 30, 2004, and replace
an interim risk-based capital treatment On October 22, 2004, the Board
approved in October 2003 and extended approved amendments to provide for
in April 2004. the rights and obligations of depository
institutions and Federal Reserve Banks
Votes for this action: Chairman Green- in connection with items handled in
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­ electronic form by the Reserve Banks.
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
The amendments ensure that the regu­
and Kohn.
lation covers the entire range of check-
processing services that the Reserve
Regulation H Banks will offer in light of the Check
Membership of Clearing for the 21st Century Act. They
State Banking Institutions in the are effective October 28, 2004.
Federal Reserve System
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
Regulation K span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
International Banking Operations
and Kohn.
Regulation V
Fair Credit Reporting Regulation V
Fair Credit Reporting
Regulation Y
[Docket Nos. R-1172, R-1175, and
Bank Holding Companies and
R-1187]
Change in Bank Control
On February 5, 2004, the Board, acting
[Docket No. R-1199]
with the Federal Trade Commission,
On December 16, 2004, the Board, act­ approved interagency amendments to
ing with the other federal bank and thrift establish effective dates for certain pro­

Record of Policy Actions of the Board of Governors 149
visions of the Fair and Accurate Credit sure requirements refers to a numerical
Transactions Act (FACT Act). The amount and to provide guidance on con­
amendments establish December 31, sumers’ exercise of the right to rescind
2003, as the effective date for the FACT certain home-secured loans. The amend­
Act provisions that preempt state laws ments are effective April 1, 2004, and
regulating areas governed by the Fair compliance is mandatory by October 1,
Credit Reporting Act. The amendments 2004.
also establish March 31, 2004, as the
effective date for FACT Act provisions Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
that require no changes, or minimal span and Governors Gramlich, Bies,
Olson, Bernanke, and Kohn. Absent and
changes, to existing business procedures
not voting: Vice Chairman Ferguson.
and December 1, 2004, as the effective
date for provisions that involve changes
requiring a significant implementation
period or regulatory action. The amend­
Regulation BB
ments are effective March 12, 2004,
Community Reinvestment
and replace an interim rule adopted in
[Docket No. R-1181]
December 2003 that established the
December 31 effective date.
On July 16, 2004, the Board withdrew
proposed amendments that would have
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
(1) raised the asset threshold for stream­
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke, lined Community Reinvestment Act
and Kohn. (CRA) evaluations of state member
banks from $250 million to $500 mil­
On June 8, 2004, the Board approved lion and (2) allowed examiners to
amendments providing model notices lower a state member bank’s CRA rating
that financial institutions may use to if the bank engaged in a pattern or
comply with the notice requirements of practice of abusive asset-based lending.
the FACT Act when furnishing negative In light of public comment, the Board
information to consumer reporting agen­ concluded that the uncertain savings
cies. The amendments are effective to institutions from increasing the
July 16, 2004. threshold did not clearly justify the
potential adverse effects on community
Votes for this action: Chairman Green- development in certain rural commu­
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­ nities. It also noted that commenters
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
were united in their opposition to defin­
and Kohn.
ing abusive asset-based lending in the
regulation to the exclusion of other abu­
sive practices. The Board and the other
federal bank and thrift regulatory agen­
cies had proposed identical amendments
Regulation Z
to their CRA regulations in February
Truth in Lending
2004.
[Docket No. R-1167]
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
On March 25, 2004, the Board approved
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
amendments to clarify that the term ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
‘‘amount’’ in the description of disclo­ and Kohn.

150 91st Annual Report, 2004
Regulation CC Policy Statements and
Availability of Funds and Other Actions
Collection of Checks
Unfair or Deceptive Acts or
[Docket No. R-1176] Practices by State-Chartered Banks
[Interagency Guidance]
On July 27, 2004, the Board approved
amendments that add a subpart D, with On March 9, 2004, the Board, acting
commentary, to implement the Check with the Federal Deposit Insurance Cor­
Clearing for the 21st Century Act. Sub­ poration, issued interagency guidance on
part D sets forth the new requirements the standards used by the two agencies
for banks, including indorsement and to determine whether acts or practices
identification requirements for substi­ by state-chartered banks are unfair or
tute checks, and contains model notices, deceptive under the Federal Trade
including a model consumer-awareness Commission Act. The guidance also
disclosure. The amendments also clarify addresses measures and ‘‘best practices’’
provisions of the regulation and its com­ that banks may use to avoid such acts or
mentary. They are effective October 28, practices.
2004, with the exception of appen­
dix C’s model consumer-awareness dis­ Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
closure, which is effective immediately,
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
and appendix D’s requirement that bank and Kohn.
indorsements and identifications be
printed in black ink, which is effective
Policy Statement
January 1, 2006.
on Payments System Risk
[Docket Nos. OP-1182 and OP-1191]
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and
On September 22, 2004, the Board
Governors Bies, Olson, Bernanke, and
revised its policy to modify the daylight
Kohn. Absent and not voting: Governor
Gramlich. overdraft measurement rules for interest
and redemption payments on securities
issued by government-sponsored enter­
prises (GSEs) and certain international
Rules of Practice for Hearings organizations and to align the treatment
of the general corporate account activity
[Docket No. OP-1211]
of these entities with that of other Fed­
On September 20, 2004, the Board eral Reserve account holders that do
approved amendments to increase the not have regular access to the discount
maximum amount of each statutory civil window. The revised policy also reflects
money penalty under its jurisdiction to recent changes to the operating hours
account for inflation, as required by the of the online Fedwire Funds Service and
Debt Collection Improvement Act. The clarifies or updates certain items. The
amendments are effective October 12, revisions related to GSEs and certain
2004. international organizations are effective
July 20, 2006, and the other revisions
Votes for this action: Chairman Green- are effective September 22, 2004.
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke, Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
and Kohn. span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­

Record of Policy Actions of the Board of Governors 151
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke, Reserve Banks must establish rates on
and Kohn. loans to depository institutions at least
every fourteen days, subject to review
On November 24, 2004, the Board
and determination by the Board of
revised the part of its policy dealing
Governors.
with risks and risk management in pay­
ments and securities settlement systems.
In general, the revisions expand the Primary Credit Rate
policy’s scope to include those Federal
Primary credit is the Federal Reserve’s
Reserve Bank payments and securities
main lending program. Primary credit is
settlement systems that meet the poli­
made available with minimal adminis­
cy’s application criteria, revise general
tration for very short terms as a backup
risk-management expectations for sys­
source of liquidity to depository insti­
tems subject to the policy, and incor­
tutions that, in the judgment of the
porate standards for payments and
lending Federal Reserve Bank, are
securities settlement systems that are
in generally sound financial condition.
systemically important. The revisions
Primary credit is extended at a rate
are effective January 2, 2005.
above the Federal Open Market Com­
mittee’s (FOMC’s) federal funds rate
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
target.
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
During 2004, the Board approved five
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
and Kohn. increases in the primary credit rate,
bringing the rate from 2 percent to
Bank Holding Company
31⁄
4
percent. The Board reached its
determinations on the primary credit rate
Rating System
recommendations of the Reserve Bank
[Docket No. OP-1207] boards of directors in conjunction with
the FOMC’s decisions to raise the target
On December 1, 2004, the Board revised
federal funds rate from 1 percent to
its bank holding company rating system
to emphasize risk management, imple­
21⁄
4
percent and related economic and
financial developments. In the first half
ment a comprehensive and adaptable
of the year, disappointing employment
framework for analyzing and rating
growth and the continued slack in
financial factors, and provide a frame­
resource utilization led the Board and
work for assessing and rating the poten­
FOMC to maintain a highly accommo­
tial impact of a bank holding company’s
dative stance of monetary policy. By
nondepository entities on its subsidiary
midyear, however, output and employ­
depository institutions. The revised rat­
ment had begun to show persistent
ing system is effective January 1, 2005.
improvements and there were indica­
tions of some increase in inflation, so
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­ the Board and FOMC began to gradu­
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke, ally move the structure of policy rates
and Kohn. toward a more neutral setting. Monetary
policy developments are reviewed more
fully elsewhere in this report (see the
Discount Rates in 2004
section ‘‘Monetary Policy and Eco­
Under the Federal Reserve Act, the nomic Developments’’ and the minutes
boards of directors of the Federal of FOMC meetings held in 2004).

152 91st Annual Report, 2004
Secondary and ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
Seasonal Credit Rates and Kohn. Votes against this action: None.
Secondary credit is available in appro­ August 10, 2004. Effective this date, the
priate circumstances to depository insti­ Board approved actions taken by the
tutions that do not qualify for pri­ directors of the Federal Reserve Banks
mary credit. The secondary credit rate of Boston, New York, Philadelphia,
is set on the basis of a formula at a Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago,
spread—50 basis points in 2004—above Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and
the primary credit rate. San Francisco to raise the rate on dis­
Seasonal credit is available to smaller counts and advances under the primary
depository institutions to meet liquidity credit program by 1⁄ 4 percentage point,
needs that arise from regular swings in to 21⁄ 2 percent. The same increase was
their loans and deposits. The rate on approved for the Federal Reserve Bank
seasonal credit is calculated every two of St. Louis, effective August 11, 2004.
weeks as an average of selected money
market yields, typically resulting in a Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
rate close to the federal funds rate target.
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
At year-end, the secondary and sea­
and Kohn. Votes against this action: None.
sonal credit rates were 33⁄
4
percent and
2.35 percent, respectively.
September 21, 2004. Effective this date,
the Board approved actions taken by the
directors of the Federal Reserve Banks
Votes on Discount Rate Changes
of Boston, New York, Philadelphia,
About every two weeks during 2004, Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago,
the Board approved proposals by the Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and
Reserve Banks to maintain the formulas San Francisco to raise the rate on dis­
for computing the secondary and sea­ counts and advances under the primary
sonal credit rates. Details on the five credit program by 1⁄ 4 percentage point,
actions by the Board to approve changes to 23⁄ 4 percent. The same increase was
in the primary credit rate are provided approved for the Federal Reserve Bank
below. of St. Louis, effective September 22,
2004.
June 30, 2004. Effective this date, the
Board approved actions taken by the Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
directors of the Federal Reserve Banks span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
of Boston, New York, Philadelphia, ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
and Kohn. Votes against this action: None.
Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago,
Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and
November 10, 2004. Effective this date,
San Francisco to raise the rate on dis­
the Board approved actions taken by the
counts and advances under the primary
directors of the Federal Reserve Banks
credit program by 1⁄
4
percentage point,
of Boston, New York, Philadelphia,
to 21⁄
4
percent. The same increase was
Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago,
approved for the Federal Reserve Bank
Minneapolis, and Kansas City to raise
of St. Louis, effective July 1, 2004.
the rate on discounts and advances
Votes for this action: Chairman Green- under the primary credit program by
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­ 1⁄ 4 percentage point, to 3 percent. The

Record of Policy Actions of the Board of Governors 153
same increase was approved for the Fed­ directors of the Federal Reserve Banks
eral Reserve Bank of St. Louis, effective of Boston, New York, Philadelphia,
November 12, 2004. Cleveland, Richmond, Atlanta, Chicago,
The Board also approved identical Minneapolis, Kansas City, Dallas, and
actions subsequently taken by the direc­ San Francisco to raise the rate on dis­
tors of the Federal Reserve Banks of counts and advances under the primary
San Francisco, effective November 10, credit program by 1⁄
4
percentage point,
2004, and Dallas, effective Novem­ to 31⁄
4
percent. The same increase was
ber 12, 2004. approved for the Federal Reserve Bank
of St. Louis, effective December 15,
Votes for this action: Chairman Green- 2004.
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
Votes for this action: Chairman Green-
and Kohn. Votes against this action: None.
span, Vice Chairman Ferguson, and Gov­
ernors Gramlich, Bies, Olson, Bernanke,
December 14, 2004. Effective this date, and Kohn. Votes against this action:
the Board approved actions taken by the None.

155
Minutes of Federal Open Market
Committee Meetings
The policy actions of the Federal Open execute transactions for the System
Market Committee, contained in the Open Market Account. In the area of
minutes of its meetings, are presented in domestic open market operations, the
the Annual Report of the Board of Gov­ Federal Reserve Bank of New York
ernors pursuant to the requirements of operates under three sets of instructions
section 10 of the Federal Reserve Act. from the Federal Open Market Com­
That section provides that the Board mittee: an Authorization for Domestic
shall keep a complete record of the Open Market Operations, Guidelines for
actions taken by the Board and by the the Conduct of System Open Market
Federal Open Market Committee on all Operations in Federal Agency Issues,
questions of policy relating to open mar­ and a Domestic Policy Directive. (A
ket operations, that it shall record new Domestic Policy Directive is
therein the votes taken in connection adopted at each regularly scheduled
with the determination of open market meeting.) In the foreign currency area,
policies and the reasons underlying each the Committee operates under an
policy action, and that it shall include in Authorization for Foreign Currency
its annual report to the Congress a full Operations, a Foreign Currency Direc­
account of such actions. tive, and Procedural Instructions with
The minutes of the meetings contain Respect to Foreign Currency Opera­
the votes on the policy decisions made tions. These policy instruments are
at those meetings as well as a re´sume´ of shown below in the form in which they
the information and discussions that led were in effect at the beginning of 2004.
to the decisions. The summary descrip­ Changes in the instruments during the
tions of economic and financial condi­ year are reported in the minutes for the
tions are based on the information that individual meetings.
was available to the Committee at the
time of the meetings rather than on data Authorization for Domestic
as they may have been revised later. Open Market Operations
Members of the Committee voting for
a particular action may differ among In Effect January 1, 2004
themselves as to the reasons for their
votes; in such cases, the range of their 1. The Federal Open Market Committee
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve
views is noted in the minutes. When
Bank of New York, to the extent neces­
members dissent from a decision, they
sary to carry out the most recent domestic
are identified in the minutes and a sum­ policy directive adopted at a meeting of the
mary of the reasons for their dissent is Committee:
provided.
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government
Policy directives of the Federal Open
securities, including securities of the Federal
Market Committee are issued to the
Financing Bank, and securities that are direct
Federal Reserve Bank of New York as obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to
the Bank selected by the Committee to principal and interest by, any agency of the

156 91st Annual Report, 2004
United States in the open market, from or to 2. In order to ensure the effective conduct
securities dealers and foreign and inter­ of open market operations, the Federal Open
national accounts maintained at the Federal Market Committee authorizes the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regu­ Reserve Bank of New York to lend on an
lar, or deferred delivery basis, for the System overnight basis U.S. Government securities
Open Market Account at market prices, and, held in the System Open Market Account to
for such Account, to exchange maturing U.S. dealers at rates that shall be determined by
Government and Federal agency securities competitive bidding. The Federal Reserve
with the Treasury or the individual agencies Bank of New York shall set a minimum
or to allow them to mature without replace­ lending fee consistent with the objectives of
ment; provided that the aggregate amount of the program and apply reasonable limitations
U.S. Government and Federal agency securi­ on the total amount of a specific issue that
ties held in such Account (including forward may be auctioned and on the amount of
commitments) at the close of business on the securities that each dealer may borrow. The
day of a meeting of the Committee at which Federal Reserve Bank of New York may
action is taken with respect to a domestic reject bids which could facilitate a dealer’s
policy directive shall not be increased or ability to control a single issue as deter­
decreased by more than $12.0 billion during mined solely by the Federal Reserve Bank of
the period commencing with the opening of New York.
business on the day following such a meet­
ing and ending with the close of business on 3. In order to ensure the effective conduct of
the day of the next such meeting; open market operations, while assisting in
the provision of short-term investments for
(b) To buy U.S. Government securities, foreign and international accounts main­
obligations that are direct obligations of, tained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New
or fully guaranteed as to principal and inter­ York, the Federal Open Market Committee
est by, any agency of the United States, from authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve
dealers for the account of the Federal Bank of New York (a) for System Open
Reserve Bank of New York under agree­ Market Account, to sell U.S. Government
ments for repurchase of such securities or securities to such foreign and international
obligations in 65 business days or less, at accounts on the bases set forth in para­
rates that, unless otherwise expressly autho­ graph 1(a) under agreements providing for
rized by the Committee, shall be determined the resale by such accounts of those securi­
by competitive bidding, after applying rea­ ties within 65 business days or less on terms
sonable limitations on the volume of agree­ comparable to those available on such trans­
ments with individual dealers; provided that actions in the market; and (b) for New York
in the event Government securities or agency Bank account, when appropriate, to under­
issues covered by any such agreement are take with dealers, subject to the conditions
not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the imposed on purchases and sales of securities
agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be in paragraph 1(b), repurchase agreements in
sold in the market or transferred to the Sys­ U.S. Government and agency securities, and
tem Open Market Account; to arrange corresponding sale and repurchase
agreements between its own account and
(c) To sell U.S. Government securities foreign and international accounts main­
and obligations that are direct obligations of, tained at the Bank. Transactions undertaken
or fully guaranteed as to principal and inter­ with such accounts under the provisions of
est by, any agency of the United States to this paragraph may provide for a service fee
dealers for System Open Market Account when appropriate.
under agreements for the resale by dealers of
such securities or obligations in 65 business 4. In the execution of the Committee’s deci­
days or less, at rates that, unless otherwise sion regarding policy during any intermeet­
expressly authorized by the Committee, shall ing period, the Committee authorizes and
be determined by competitive bidding, after directs the Federal Reserve Bank of
applying reasonable limitations on the vol­ New York, upon the instruction of the Chair­
ume of agreements with individual dealers. man of the Committee, to adjust somewhat

Minutes of FOMC Meetings 157
in exceptional circumstances the degree of The Committee perceives that the upside
pressure on reserve positions and hence the and downside risks to the attainment of sus­
intended federal funds rate. Any such adjust­ tainable growth for the next few quarters are
ment shall be made in the context of the roughly equal. The probability of an unwel­
Committee’s discussion and decision at its come fall in inflation has diminished in
most recent meeting and the Committee’s recent months and now appears almost equal
long-run objectives for price stability and to that of a rise in inflation.
sustainable economic growth, and shall be
based on economic, financial, and mone­
tary developments during the intermeeting
period. Consistent with Committee prac­ Authorization for Foreign
tice, the Chairman, if feasible, will consult Currency Operations
with the Committee before making any
adjustment.
In Effect January 1, 2004
Guidelines for the Conduct of 1. The Federal Open Market Committee
System Open Market Operations authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve
Bank of New York, for System Open Market
in Federal Agency Issues
Account, to the extent necessary to carry out
the Committee’s foreign currency directive
In Effect January 1, 2004 and express authorizations by the Commit­
tee pursuant thereto, and in conformity with
1. System open market operations in Fed­
such procedural instructions as the Commit­
eral agency issues are an integral part of total
tee may issue from time to time:
System open market operations designed to
influence bank reserves, money market con­
A. To purchase and sell the following
ditions, and monetary aggregates.
foreign currencies in the form of cable trans­
fers through spot or forward transactions on
2. System open market operations in Fed­
the open market at home and abroad, includ­
eral agency issues are not designed to sup­
ing transactions with the U.S. Treasury, with
port individual sectors of the market or
the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund estab­
to channel funds into issues of particular
lished by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve
agencies.
Act of 1934, with foreign monetary authori­
ties, with the Bank for International Settle­
ments, and with other international financial
Domestic Policy Directive
institutions:
In Effect January 1, 20041 Canadian dollars Mexican pesos
Danish kroner Norwegian kroner
Euro Swedish kronor
The Federal Open Market Committee seeks Pounds sterling Swiss francs
monetary and financial conditions that will Japanese yen
foster price stability and promote sustainable
B. To hold balances of, and to have
growth in output. To further its long-run
outstanding forward contracts to receive or
objectives, the Committee in the immediate
to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in
future seeks conditions in reserve markets
paragraph A above.
consistent with maintaining the federal funds
rate at an average of around 1 percent. C. To draw foreign currencies and to
permit foreign banks to draw dollars under
The Committee also approved the the reciprocal currency arrangements listed
sentences below for inclusion in the in paragraph 2 below, provided that draw­
ings by either party to any such arrangement
press statement to be released shortly
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months
after the December 9, 2003, meeting:
after any amount outstanding at that time
was first drawn, unless the Committee,
1. Adopted by the Committee at its meeting on because of exceptional circumstances, spe­
December 9, 2003. cifically authorizes a delay.

158 91st Annual Report, 2004
D. To maintain an overall open posi­ ing operating arrangements with foreign
tion in all foreign currencies not exceeding central banks on System holdings of foreign
$25.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall currencies, the Federal Reserve Bank of
open position in all foreign currencies is New York shall not commit itself to maintain
defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of any specific balance unless authorized by
net positions in individual currencies. The the Federal Open Market Committee. Any
net position in a single foreign currency is agreements or understandings concerning the
defined as holdings of balances in that cur­ administration of the accounts maintained by
rency, plus outstanding contracts for future the Federal Reserve Bank of New York with
receipt, minus outstanding contracts for the foreign banks designated by the Board
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the of Governors under Section 214.5 of Regu­
sum of these elements with due regard to lation N shall be referred for review and
sign. approval to the Committee.
2. The Federal Open Market Commit­ 5. Foreign currency holdings shall be in­
tee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of vested to ensure that adequate liquidity is
New York to maintain reciprocal currency maintained to meet anticipated needs and so
arrangements (‘‘swap’’ arrangements) for the that each currency portfolio shall generally
System Open Market Account for periods up have an average duration of no more than
to a maximum of 12 months with the follow­ 18 months (calculated as Macaulay dura­
ing foreign banks, which are among those tion). When appropriate in connection with
designated by the Board of Governors of the arrangements to provide investment facilities
Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5 for foreign currency holdings, U.S. Govern­
of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign ment securities may be purchased from for­
Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of eign central banks under agreements for
the Committee to renew such arrangements repurchase of such securities within 30 cal­
on maturity: endar days.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to
Amount the preceding paragraphs shall be reported
of arrangement
Foreign bank (millions of promptly to the Foreign Currency Sub­
dollars equivalent) committee and the Committee. The Foreign
Currency Subcommittee consists of the
Bank of Canada ............................... 2,000 Chairman and Vice Chairman of the Com­
Bank of Mexico ............................... 3,000
mittee, the Vice Chairman of the Board of
Governors, and such other member of the
Any changes in the terms of existing swap Board as the Chairman may designate (or in
arrangements, and the proposed terms of any the absence of members of the Board serving
new arrangements that may be authorized, on the Subcommittee, other Board members
shall be referred for review and approval to designated by the Chairman as alternates,
the Committee. and in the absence of the Vice Chairman of
the Committee, his alternate). Meetings of
3. All transactions in foreign currencies the Subcommittee shall be called at the
undertaken under paragraph 1.A. above request of any member, or at the request of
shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized the Manager, System Open Market Account
by the Committee, be at prevailing market (‘‘Manager’’), for the purposes of reviewing
rates. For the purpose of providing an invest­ recent or contemplated operations and of
ment return on System holdings of foreign consulting with the Manager on other mat­
currencies, or for the purpose of adjusting ters relating to his responsibilities. At the
interest rates paid or received in connection request of any member of the Subcommittee,
with swap drawings, transactions with for­ questions arising from such reviews and con­
eign central banks may be undertaken at sultations shall be referred for determination
nonmarket exchange rates. to the Federal Open Market Committee.
7. The Chairman is authorized:
4. It shall be the normal practice to arrange
with foreign central banks for the coordina­ A. With the approval of the Commit­
tion of foreign currency transactions. In mak­ tee, to enter into any needed agreement or

Minutes of FOMC Meetings 159
understanding with the Secretary of the Trea­ currencies and to facilitate operations of the
sury about the division of responsibility for Exchange Stabilization Fund.
foreign currency operations between the Sys­
C. For such other purposes as may be
tem and the Treasury;
expressly authorized by the Committee.
B. To keep the Secretary of the Trea­
4. System foreign currency operations shall
sury fully advised concerning System for­
be conducted:
eign currency operations, and to consult with
the Secretary on policy matters relating to A. In close and continuous consulta­
foreign currency operations; tion and cooperation with the United States
Treasury;
C. From time to time, to transmit
appropriate reports and information to the B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with
National Advisory Council on International foreign monetary authorities; and
Monetary and Financial Policies.
C. In a manner consistent with the obli­
8. Staff officers of the Committee are autho­ gations of the United States in the Interna­
rized to transmit pertinent information on tional Monetary Fund regarding exchange
System foreign currency operations to appro­ arrangements under the IMF Article IV.
priate officials of the Treasury Department.
9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall partici­ Procedural Instructions with
pate in the foreign currency operations for
Respect to Foreign Currency
System Account in accordance with para­
Operations
graph 3 G(1) of the Board of Governors’
Statement of Procedure with Respect to For­
eign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks In Effect January 1, 2004
dated January 1, 1944.
In conducting operations pursuant to the
authorization and direction of the Federal
Foreign Currency Directive
Open Market Committee as set forth in the
Authorization for Foreign Currency Opera­
In Effect January 1, 2004 tions and the Foreign Currency Directive,
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
1. System operations in foreign currencies through the Manager, System Open Market
shall generally be directed at countering dis­ Account (‘‘Manager’’), shall be guided by
orderly market conditions, provided that the following procedural understandings
market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar with respect to consultations and clearances
reflect actions and behavior consistent with with the Committee, the Foreign Currency
the IMF Article IV, Section 1. Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the
Committee. All operations undertaken pur­
2. To achieve this end the System shall:
suant to such clearances shall be reported
A. Undertake spot and forward pur­ promptly to the Committee.
chases and sales of foreign exchange.
1. The Manager shall clear with the Sub­
B. Maintain reciprocal currency
committee (or with the Chairman, if the
(‘‘swap’’) arrangements with selected for­
Chairman believes that consultation with the
eign central banks.
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time
C. Cooperate in other respects with available):
central banks of other countries and with
international monetary institutions. A. Any operation that would result in a
change in the System’s overall open position
3. Transactions may also be undertaken: in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million
on any day or $600 million since the most
A. To adjust System balances in light
recent regular meeting of the Committee.
of probable future needs for currencies.
B. To provide means for meeting Sys­ B. Any operation that would result in a
tem and Treasury commitments in particular change on any day in the System’s net posi­

160 91st Annual Report, 2004
tion in a single foreign currency exceeding Present:
$150 million, or $300 million when the Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
operation is associated with repayment of Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
swap drawings. Mr. Bernanke
Ms. Bies
C. Any operation that might generate a Mr. Ferguson
substantial volume of trading in a particular Mr. Gramlich
currency by the System, even though the Mr. Hoenig
change in the System’s net position in that Mr. Kohn
currency might be less than the limits speci­ Ms. Minehan
fied in 1.B. Mr. Olson
Ms. Pianalto
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a Mr. Poole
foreign bank not exceeding the larger of
(i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size Messrs. McTeer, Moskow, Santomero,
of the swap arrangement. and Stern, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market
2. The Manager shall clear with the Com­ Committee
mittee (or with the Subcommittee, if the
Subcommittee believes that consultation Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, and Parry,
with the full Committee is not feasible in the Presidents of the Federal Reserve
time available, or with the Chairman, if the Banks of Richmond, Atlanta,
Chairman believes that consultation with and San Francisco respectively
the Subcommittee is not feasible in the time
available): Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
A. Any operation that would result in a Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
change in the System’s overall open position Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
since the most recent regular meeting of the Ms. Johnson, Economist
Committee. Mr. Stockton, Economist
B. Any swap drawing proposed by Mr. Connors, Ms. Cumming,
a foreign bank exceeding the larger of Messrs. Fuhrer, Hakkio, Howard,
(i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the Madigan, Rasche, Slifman,
size of the swap arrangement. Sniderman, and Wilcox, Associate
Economists
3. The Manager shall also consult with the
Subcommittee or the Chairman about pro­ Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open
posed swap drawings by the System and Market Account
about any operations that are not of a routine
character. Mr. Ettin2, Deputy Director, Division
of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Meeting Held on
January 27–28, 2004 Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer,
Associate Directors, Division of
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Research and Statistics, Board
Committee was held in the offices of of Governors
the Board of Governors of the Federal
Messrs. Clouse,2 and Whitesell, Deputy
Reserve System in Washington, D.C.,
Associate Directors, Division of
starting at 2:00 p.m. on Tuesday, Jan­
Monetary Affairs, Board of
uary 27, 2004, and continuing at Governors
9:00 a.m. on Wednesday, January 28,
2004. 2. Attended Wednesday’s session only.

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, January 161
Mr. Kamin and Ms. Zickler,3 Deputy these individuals had executed their
Associate Directors, Divisions oaths of office.
of International Finance and
The elected members and alternate
Research and Statistics
members were as follows:
respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. English, Assistant Director, Timothy F. Geithner, President of the Fed­
Division of Monetary Affairs, eral Reserve Bank of New York, with a
Board of Governors vacancy in the position of alternate
member for the Federal Reserve Bank
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the of New York
Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors Cathy E. Minehan, President of the Fed­
eral Reserve Bank of Boston, with
Messrs. Nelson and Wood,3 Senior Anthony M. Santomero, President of
Economists, Divisions of the Federal Reserve Bank of Philadel­
Monetary Affairs and International phia, as alternate
Finance respectively, Board of
Governors Sandra Pianalto, President of the Federal
Reserve Bank of Cleveland, with
Mr. Carpenter,3 Economist, Division Michael H. Moskow, President of the
of Monetary Affairs, Board of Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, as
Governors alternate
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, William Poole, President of the Federal
Division of Monetary Affairs, Reserve Bank of St. Louis, with Rob­
Board of Governors ert D. McTeer, Jr., President of the
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas, as
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat alternate
Assistant, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors Thomas M. Hoenig, President of the Fed­
eral Reserve Bank of Kansas City, with
Messrs. Eisenbeis, Evans, Goodfriend, Gary H. Stern, President of the Fed­
Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rolnick eral Reserve Bank of Minneapolis, as
and Rosenblum, Senior Vice alternate
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Atlanta, Chicago, Richmond, Following this meeting the board of
Philadelphia, Minneapolis, and
directors of the Federal Reserve Bank of
Dallas respectively
New York appointed Christine M. Cum­
Messrs. Elsasser and Rudebusch, ming to the position of First Vice Presi­
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve dent of the Bank, effective February 6,
Banks of New York and 2004. The directors also elected her to
San Francisco respectively
serve as an alternate member of the Fed­
eral Open Market Committee repre­
In the agenda for this meeting, it was
senting the Federal Reserve Bank of
reported that advices of the election of
New York. Subsequently, Ms. Cumming
the following members and alternate
executed her oath of office as an alter­
members of the Federal Open Market
nate member of the Committee, effec­
Committee for the period commencing
tive for the period from February 20 to
January 1, 2004, and ending Decem­
December 31, 2004.
ber 31, 2004, had been received and that
By unanimous vote, the following
officers of the Federal Open Market
3. Attended portion of meeting relating to the
Committee’s review of the economic outlook. Committee were elected to serve until

162 91st Annual Report, 2004
the election of their successors at the By unanimous vote, the Committee
first regularly scheduled meeting of the amended its Program for Security of
Committee after December 31, 2004, FOMC Information on January 27,
with the understanding that in the event 2004, by making small clarifying addi­
of the discontinuance of their official tions or changes relating especially to
connection with the Board of Governors electronic transmissions of confidential
or with a Federal Reserve Bank, they information.
would cease to have any official con­ By unanimous vote, the Authoriza­
nection with the Federal Open Market tion for Domestic Open Market Opera­
Committee: tions was amended in the form shown
below.
Alan Greenspan Chairman
Timothy F. Geithner Vice Chairman
Vincent R. Reinhart Secretary and
Authorization for Domestic
Economist
Normand R.V. Bernard Deputy Secretary Open Market Operations
Michelle A. Smith Assistant
Secretary 1. The Federal Open Market Committee
J. Virgil Mattingly, Jr. General Counsel authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve
Thomas C. Baxter, Jr. Deputy General Bank of New York, to the extent neces­
Counsel sary to carry out the most recent domestic
Karen H. Johnson Economist policy directive adopted at a meeting of the
David J. Stockton Economist Committee:
(a) To buy or sell U.S. Government
Thomas A. Connors, Christine M. securities, including securities of the Federal
Cumming, Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, Craig S. Financing Bank, and securities that are direct
Hakkio, David H. Howard, Brian F. obligations of, or fully guaranteed as to
Madigan, Robert H. Rasche, Lawrence principal and interest by, any agency of the
Slifman, Mark S. Sniderman, and United States in the open market, from or to
David W. Wilcox, Associate securities dealers and foreign and interna­
Economists tional accounts maintained at the Federal
Reserve Bank of New York, on a cash, regu­
By unanimous vote, the Federal lar, or deferred delivery basis, for the System
Open Market Account at market prices, and,
Reserve Bank of New York was selected
for such Account, to exchange maturing U.S.
to execute transactions for the System
Government and Federal agency securities
Open Market Account until the adjourn­ with the Treasury or the individual agencies
ment of the first regularly scheduled or to allow them to mature without replace­
meeting of the Committee after Decem­ ment; provided that the aggregate amount of
U.S. Government and Federal agency securi­
ber 31, 2004.
ties held in such Account (including forward
By unanimous vote, Dino Kos was
commitments) at the close of business on the
selected to serve at the pleasure of the day of a meeting of the Committee at which
Committee as Manager, System Open action is taken with respect to a domestic
Market Account, on the understanding policy directive shall not be increased or
decreased by more than $12.0 billion during
that his selection was subject to being
the period commencing with the opening of
satisfactory to the Federal Reserve Bank
business on the day following such a meet­
of New York.4 ing and ending with the close of business on
the day of the next such meeting;
(b) To buy U.S. Government securities,
4. Secretary’s note: Advice subsequently was obligations that are direct obligations of, or
received that the selection of Mr. Kos as Manager fully guaranteed as to principal and interest
was satisfactory to the board of directors of the by, any agency of the United States, from
Federal Reserve Bank of New York. dealers for the account of the Federal

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, January 163
Reserve Bank of New York under agree­ System Open Market Account, to sell U.S.
ments for repurchase of such securities or Government securities to such accounts on
obligations in 65 business days or less, at the bases set forth in paragraph 1(a) under
rates that, unless otherwise expressly autho­ agreements providing for the resale by such
rized by the Committee, shall be determined accounts of those securities in 65 business
by competitive bidding, after applying rea­ days or less on terms comparable to those
sonable limitations on the volume of agree­ available on such transactions in the market;
ments with individual dealers; provided that and (b) for New York Bank account, when
in the event Government securities or agency appropriate, to undertake with dealers, sub­
issues covered by any such agreement are ject to the conditions imposed on purchases
not repurchased by the dealer pursuant to the and sales of securities in paragraph 1(b),
agreement or a renewal thereof, they shall be repurchase agreements in U.S. Government
sold in the market or transferred to the Sys­ and agency securities, and to arrange corre­
tem Open Market Account. sponding sale and repurchase agreements
(c) To sell U.S. Government securities between its own account and such foreign,
and obligations that are direct obligations of, international, and fiscal agency accounts
or fully guaranteed as to principal and inter­ maintained at the Bank. Transactions under­
est by, any agency of the United States to taken with such accounts under the pro­
dealers for System Open Market Account visions of this paragraph may provide for a
under agreements for the resale by dealers service fee when appropriate.
of such securities or obligations in 65 busi­ 4. In the execution of the Committee’s
ness days or less, at rates that, unless other­ decision regarding policy during any inter-
wise expressly authorized by the Committee, meeting period, the Committee authorizes
shall be determined by competitive bidding, and directs the Federal Reserve Bank of New
after applying reasonable limitations on York, upon the instruction of the Chairman
the volume of agreements with individual of the Committee, to adjust somewhat in
dealers. exceptional circumstances the degree of
2. In order to ensure the effective conduct pressure on reserve positions and hence the
of open market operations, the Federal Open intended federal funds rate. Any such adjust­
Market Committee authorizes the Federal ment shall be made in the context of the
Reserve Bank of New York to lend on an Committee’s discussion and decision at its
overnight basis U.S. Government securities most recent meeting and the Committee’s
held in the System Open Market Account long-run objectives for price stability and
to dealers at rates that shall be determined sustainable economic growth, and shall be
by competitive bidding. The Federal Reserve based on economic, financial, and mone­
Bank of New York shall set a minimum tary developments during the intermeeting
lending fee consistent with the objectives of period. Consistent with Committee prac­
the program and apply reasonable limitations tice, the Chairman, if feasible, will consult
on the total amount of a specific issue that with the Committee before making any
may be auctioned and on the amount of adjustment.
securities that each dealer may borrow. The
Federal Reserve Bank of New York may
The amendment to the authorization
reject bids which could facilitate a dealer’s
ability to control a single issue as deter­ for domestic open market operations
mined solely by the Federal Reserve Bank of involved the addition of a reference in
New York. paragraph 3 to accounts held at the Fed­
3. In order to ensure the effective conduct
eral Reserve Bank of New York pursu­
of open market operations, while assisting
ant to fiscal agency instructions from
in the provision of short-term investments
for foreign and international accounts main­ the Secretary of the Treasury. Accounts
tained at the Federal Reserve Bank of New listed in paragraph 3, which include
York and accounts maintained at the Federal those maintained by the Bank on behalf
Reserve Bank of New York as fiscal agent
of official foreign and international
of the United States pursuant to Section 15
accounts, are eligible for participation in
of the Federal Reserve Act, the Federal Open
Market Committee authorizes and directs the the Bank’s short-term investment facil­
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (a) for ity, the so-called ‘‘repo pool.’’

164 91st Annual Report, 2004
By unanimous vote, the Authoriza­ defined as holdings of balances in that cur­
tion for Foreign Currency Operations rency, plus outstanding contracts for future
receipt, minus outstanding contracts for
was reaffirmed in the form shown
future delivery of that currency, i.e., as the
below.
sum of these elements with due regard to
sign.
2. The Federal Open Market Commit­
Authorization for Foreign tee directs the Federal Reserve Bank of
Currency Operations New York to maintain reciprocal currency
arrangements (‘‘swap’’ arrangements) for the
1. The Federal Open Market Committee System Open Market Account for periods up
authorizes and directs the Federal Reserve to a maximum of 12 months with the follow­
Bank of New York, for System Open Market ing foreign banks, which are among those
Account, to the extent necessary to carry out designated by the Board of Governors of the
the Committee’s foreign currency directive Federal Reserve System under Section 214.5
and express authorizations by the Committee of Regulation N, Relations with Foreign
pursuant thereto, and in conformity with Banks and Bankers, and with the approval of
such procedural instructions as the Commit­ the Committee to renew such arrangements
tee may issue from time to time: on maturity:
A. To purchase and sell the following
foreign currencies in the form of cable trans­
fers through spot or forward transactions on Amount of
the open market at home and abroad, includ­ Foreign bank arrangement
ing transactions with the U.S. Treasury, with (millions of
dollars equivalent)
the U.S. Exchange Stabilization Fund estab­
lished by Section 10 of the Gold Reserve Act
Bank of Canada .............................. 2,000
of 1934, with foreign monetary authori­ Bank of Mexico .............................. 3,000
ties, with the Bank for International Settle­
ments, and with other international financial
institutions: Any changes in the terms of existing swap
arrangements, and the proposed terms of any
Canadian dollars Mexican pesos new arrangements that may be authorized,
Danish kroner Norwegian kroner shall be referred for review and approval to
Euro Swedish kronor
the Committee.
Pounds sterling Swiss francs
Japanese yen 3. All transactions in foreign currencies
undertaken under paragraph 1.A. above
B. To hold balances of, and to have shall, unless otherwise expressly authorized
outstanding forward contracts to receive or by the Committee, be at prevailing market
to deliver, the foreign currencies listed in rates. For the purpose of providing an invest­
paragraph A above. ment return on System holdings of foreign
C. To draw foreign currencies and to currencies or for the purpose of adjusting
permit foreign banks to draw dollars under interest rates paid or received in connection
the reciprocal currency arrangements listed with swap drawings, transactions with for­
in paragraph 2 below, provided that draw­ eign central banks may be undertaken at
ings by either party to any such arrangement non-market exchange rates.
shall be fully liquidated within 12 months 4. It shall be the normal practice to
after any amount outstanding at that time arrange with foreign central banks for the
was first drawn, unless the Committee, coordination of foreign currency transac­
because of exceptional circumstances, spe­ tions. In making operating arrangements
cifically authorizes a delay. with foreign central banks on System hold­
D. To maintain an overall open posi­ ings of foreign currencies, the Federal
tion in all foreign currencies not exceeding Reserve Bank of New York shall not com­
$25.0 billion. For this purpose, the overall mit itself to maintain any specific balance,
open position in all foreign currencies is unless authorized by the Federal Open Mar­
defined as the sum (disregarding signs) of ket Committee. Any agreements or under­
net positions in individual currencies. The standings concerning the administration of
net position in a single foreign currency is the accounts maintained by the Federal

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, January 165
Reserve Bank of New York with the foreign National Advisory Council on International
banks designated by the Board of Governors Monetary and Financial Policies.
under Section 214.5 of Regulation N shall 8. Staff officers of the Committee are
be referred for review and approval to the authorized to transmit pertinent informa­
Committee. tion on System foreign currency operations
5. Foreign currency holdings shall be to appropriate officials of the Treasury
invested to ensure that adequate liquidity is Department.
maintained to meet anticipated needs and so 9. All Federal Reserve Banks shall par­
that each currency portfolio shall generally ticipate in the foreign currency operations
have an average duration of no more than for System Account in accordance with para­
18 months (calculated as Macaulay dura­ graph 3G(1) of the Board of Governors’
tion). When appropriate in connection with Statement of Procedure with Respect to For­
arrangements to provide investment facilities eign Relationships of Federal Reserve Banks
for foreign currency holdings, U.S. Govern­ dated January 1, 1944.
ment securities may be purchased from for­
eign central banks under agreements for By unanimous vote, the Foreign Cur­
repurchase of such securities within 30 cal­
rency Directive was reaffirmed in the
endar days.
form shown below.
6. All operations undertaken pursuant to
the preceding paragraphs shall be reported
promptly to the Foreign Currency Subcom­ Foreign Currency Directive
mittee and the Committee. The Foreign Cur­
rency Subcommittee consists of the Chair­ 1. System operations in foreign curren­
man and Vice Chairman of the Committee, cies shall generally be directed at countering
the Vice Chairman of the Board of Gover­ disorderly market conditions, provided that
nors, and such other member of the Board market exchange rates for the U.S. dollar
as the Chairman may designate (or in the reflect actions and behavior consistent with
absence of members of the Board serving on IMF Article IV, Section 1.
the Subcommittee, other Board members 2. To achieve this end the System shall:
designated by the Chairman as alternates, A. Undertake spot and forward pur­
and in the absence of the Vice Chairman chases and sales of foreign exchange.
of the Committee, his alternate). Meetings B. Maintain reciprocal currency
of the Subcommittee shall be called at the (‘‘swap’’) arrangements with selected for­
request of any member, or at the request of eign central banks.
the Manager, System Open Market Account C. Cooperate in other respects with
(‘‘Manager’’), for the purposes of reviewing central banks of other countries and with
recent or contemplated operations and of international monetary institutions.
consulting with the Manager on other mat­ 3. Transactions may also be undertaken:
ters relating to his responsibilities. At the A. To adjust System balances in light
request of any member of the Subcommittee, of probable future needs for currencies.
questions arising from such reviews and con­ B. To provide means for meeting Sys­
sultations shall be referred for determination tem and Treasury commitments in particular
to the Federal Open Market Committee. currencies, and to facilitate operations of the
7. The Chairman is authorized: Exchange Stabilization Fund.
A. With the approval of the Commit­ C. For such other purposes as may be
tee, to enter into any needed agreement or expressly authorized by the Committee.
understanding with the Secretary of the Trea­ 4. System foreign currency operations
sury about the division of responsibility for shall be conducted:
foreign currency operations between the Sys­ A. In close and continuous consulta­
tem and the Treasury; tion and cooperation with the United States
B. To keep the Secretary of the Trea­ Treasury;
sury fully advised concerning System for­ B. In cooperation, as appropriate, with
eign currency operations, and to consult with foreign monetary authorities; and
the Secretary on policy matters relating to C. In a manner consistent with the obli­
foreign currency operations; gations of the United States in the Interna­
C. From time to time, to transmit tional Monetary Fund regarding exchange
appropriate reports and information to the arrangements under IMF Article IV.

166 91st Annual Report, 2004
By unanimous vote, the Procedural Chairman believes that consultation with the
Instructions with Respect to Foreign Subcommittee is not feasible in the time
available):
Currency Operations were reaffirmed in
A. Any operation that would result in a
the form shown below.
change in the System’s overall open position
in foreign currencies exceeding $1.5 billion
since the most recent regular meeting of the
Procedural Instructions with
Committee.
Respect to Foreign B. Any swap drawing proposed by a
Currency Operations foreign bank exceeding the larger of (i) $200
million or (ii) 15 percent of the size of the
In conducting operations pursuant to the swap arrangement.
authorization and direction of the Federal 3. The Manager shall also consult with
Open Market Committee as set forth in the the Subcommittee or the Chairman about
Authorization for Foreign Currency Opera­ proposed swap drawings by the System and
tions and the Foreign Currency Directive, about any operations that are not of a routine
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York, character.
through the Manager, System Open Market
Account (‘‘Manager’’), shall be guided by
the following procedural understandings On January 9, 2004, the continuing
with respect to consultations and clearances rules, regulations, and other instructions
with the Committee, the Foreign Currency
of the Committee had been distributed
Subcommittee, and the Chairman of the
with the advice that, in accordance with
Committee. All operations undertaken pur­
suant to such clearances shall be reported procedures approved by the Committee,
promptly to the Committee. they were being called to the Commit­
1. The Manager shall clear with the Sub­ tee’s attention before the January 27–28
committee (or with the Chairman, if the
organization meeting to give members
Chairman believes that consultation with the
an opportunity to raise any questions
Subcommittee is not feasible in the time
available): they might have concerning them. Mem­
A. Any operation that would result in a bers were asked to indicate if they
change in the System’s overall open position wished to have any of the instruments
in foreign currencies exceeding $300 million
in question placed on the agenda
on any day or $600 million since the most
for consideration at this meeting, and
recent regular meeting of the Committee.
B. Any operation that would result in a no requests for consideration were
change on any day in the System’s net posi­ received. Accordingly, all of these
tion in a single foreign currency exceed­ instruments remained in effect in their
ing $150 million, or $300 million when the existing form.
operation is associated with repayment of
The Committee considered a report
swap drawings.
from the Manager of the System Open
C. Any operation that might generate a
substantial volume of trading in a particular Market Account that discussed the feasi­
currency by the System, even though the bility and costs of purchasing mortgage-
change in the System’s net position in that backed securities guaranteed by the
currency might be less than the limits speci­
Government National Mortgage Asso­
fied in 1.B.
ciation (GNMA), a federal government
D. Any swap drawing proposed by a
foreign bank not exceeding the larger of agency. A potential advantage of trans­
(i) $200 million or (ii) 15 percent of the size actions in such GNMA obligations was
of the swap arrangement. their use to supplement purchases of
2. The Manager shall clear with the Com­
direct Treasury securities in periods
mittee (or with the Subcommittee, if the
when large federal surpluses reduced
Subcommittee believes that consultation
with the full Committee is not feasible in the market supplies of Treasury debt. How­
time available, or with the Chairman, if the ever, the resumption of large federal

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, January 167
deficits had led to sizable increases in reasons for policy decisions and how
market supplies of Treasury obligations, those decisions related to the Commit­
which members saw as the preferred tee’s longer-term objectives. However,
vehicle to supply the need for perma­ only limited support emerged for the
nent additions to the System Open use of particular standard wording to
Market Account. The report concluded express the Committee’s appraisals of
that outright transactions in mortgage- the economic outlook and views about
backed GNMA securities were feasible the balance of risks. Indeed, several
but would involve sizable start-up costs members were in favor of discontinuing
and would tend to complicate the con­ the use of statements regarding the bal­
duct of System open market operations. ance of risks to the outlook and instead
Against this background the Committee focusing mostly on the reasons for their
decided not to initiate outright transac­ policy decisions in the announcement.
tions in mortgage-backed GNMA obli­ At the same time, all the members indi­
gations. It was understood, however, cated that they could support a flexible
that such GNMA obligations would con­ approach in which the wording of the
tinue to be eligible as collateral for Sys­ Committee’s announcements, including
tem repurchase agreements. the assessment of the balance of risks
By unanimous vote, the minutes of going forward, would be adjusted gradu­
the meeting of the Federal Open Market ally over time in keeping with evolving
Committee held on December 9, 2003, economic conditions.
were approved. In further discussion the members
The Manager of the System Open reviewed the potential value and draw­
Market Account reported on recent backs of accelerating the publication of
developments in foreign exchange mar­ Committee minutes. Possible benefits
kets. There were no open market opera­ would include the provision of more
tions in foreign currencies for the Sys­ complete information sooner after meet­
tem’s Account in the period since the ings on the considerations that led the
previous meeting. Committee to adopt the current stance
The Manager also reported on devel­ of policy. Some members expressed
opments in domestic financial markets concern, however, that accelerated
and on System open market transactions release of the minutes might have the
in government securities and federal potential to feed back adversely on the
agency obligations during the period deliberations of the Committee and on
December 9, 2003 to January 27, 2004. the minutes themselves. The members
By unanimous vote, the Committee rati­ also emphasized the importance of
fied these transactions. allowing sufficient time for them to
At this meeting the Committee review and comment on the minutes and
engaged in a broad-ranging discussion for reconciling differences of opinion
of its communication practices. among the members of a large and geo­
A portion of this discussion focused graphically dispersed committee. At the
on the report of a working group that conclusion of this discussion, staff was
had been directed to study how the asked to study the issue further.
Committee’s announcements might be The members also discussed the
improved. In the course of the discus­ possible advantages of making some
sion, members stressed the importance changes in the content, time horizon,
that they attached to conveying clearly and frequency of the individual fore­
to the public information regarding the casts that are summarized in the semi­

168 91st Annual Report, 2004
annual Monetary Policy Reports to the ment over the average monthly loss dur­
Congress. In general, the members saw ing the first half of the year. Manufac­
little to be gained by altering the Com­ turing payrolls continued to shrink in
mittee’s current practices in any signifi­ December at about the same pace as in
cant way, although some proposed rela­ the previous few months, and holiday-
tively minor changes. It was agreed that related hiring in retail trade was below
there was no need to reach a decision on average. In other sectors, job gains were
such changes at this time, but staff was recorded in construction, education and
instructed to ascertain the degree of health services, and professional and
interest on the part of the members in business services. Average weekly hours
making possible minor adjustments to of production or nonsupervisory work­
current procedures. ers declined somewhat in December,
The Committee then turned to a dis­ reversing the gains of the previous two
cussion of the economic outlook and the months. Aggregate hours worked by
conduct of monetary policy over the nonfarm employees fell in December
intermeeting period. but in the fourth quarter as a whole
The economy appeared to have posted their first quarterly increase since
expanded at a robust pace in the fourth 2000. Despite the weak payroll data, the
quarter, though well below the excep­ unemployment rate, which is measured
tional pace recorded in the third quar­ by the household survey, fell to 5.7 per­
ter. Consumer spending continued to cent in December, in part because of a
increase at a solid rate over the final further decline in the labor force partici­
three months of the year, and activity in pation rate. Initial claims for unemploy­
the residential sector remained at a very ment insurance continued to drift down
high level. On the business side, out­ in the weeks following the reference
lays for equipment and software likely week for the December employment
posted moderate gains in the fourth report, suggesting improved job growth
quarter, and firms apparently accumu­ in January.
lated inventories for the first time in The pace of expansion in the indus­
three quarters. Despite the strong pace trial sector picked up in the fourth quar­
of economic activity, the labor market ter. Total industrial production rose at
was improving only slowly, with private the fastest rate since the second quar­
payrolls showing a small acceleration in ter of 2002, and manufacturing pro­
the fourth quarter. Core consumer price duction posted solid and widespread
inflation continued to slow, and infla­ gains. High-tech industries, including
tion expectations remained subdued those producing semiconductors, com­
over the closing months of 2003. puters, and communications equipment,
The December employment report accounted for nearly one-third of the
suggested that the labor market had not increase in total industrial production in
gained as much momentum as previ­ the fourth quarter. After having surged
ously appeared to be under way. Private in the third quarter, the production of
nonfarm payrolls increased only slightly motor vehicles and parts moved up in
in that month, and their level in Novem­ the fourth quarter at about the same rate
ber was revised down appreciably. The as overall manufacturing. Outside the
average monthly increase in employ­ manufacturing sector, output at mines
ment in the fourth quarter was indicative increased modestly in the quarter, while
of a fairly weak recovery in the labor output at utilities rose appreciably, led
market, although it was a clear improve­ by a solid advance in electricity genera­

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, January 169
tion that mirrored the strengthening below the levels that prevailed before
in the manufacturing sector. Capacity the downturn following the terrorist
utilization was unchanged in December attacks in 2001. Both fleet sales of light
and remained well below its long-term vehicles and truck sales also rose signifi­
average. cantly. In the high-tech sector, real out­
Sales of light vehicles jumped in lays for computing equipment and for
December, and the fourth-quarter aver­ software again appeared to have posted
age, although below the torrid third- sizable increases in the fourth quarter,
quarter pace, was well above that while spending on communications
recorded for the first half of the year. equipment was little changed after three
These data, along with those on retail quarters of double-digit growth. Outside
sales excluding autos, were consistent transportation and high tech, nominal
with a solid increase in real personal shipments were about unchanged in the
consumption expenditures in the fourth fourth quarter, but the upward trend in
quarter. Real disposable personal orders established since the beginning
income advanced smartly in Novem­ of last year was consistent with further
ber. Spending was also supported by gains in spending. After holding roughly
the recent stock market gains, and steady, on balance, in the first half of
by greater consumer confidence as 2003, real spending on private nonresi­
reflected in the Michigan Survey dential construction appeared to have
Research Center’s index of consumer slipped further in the third and fourth
sentiment and the Conference Board’s quarters. In the commercial and health-
index of consumer confidence, both of care sector and in the manufactur­
which stood significantly above their ing sector, average nominal outlays
average readings for 2003. in October and November were about
Activity in the housing market unchanged from the previous quarter.
remained very robust. In December, However, spending on other types of
single-family starts edged down only a construction moved down.
bit from the exceptional rate they had The book value of manufacturing and
reached in November, and multifamily trade inventories excluding motor vehi­
starts moved up to the highest level in cles posted the third consecutive signifi­
almost four years. New home sales cant monthly increase in November.
declined in November for the third con­ Stocks at manufacturers were down a
secutive month, but they were still not little on average in October and Novem­
far below the record highs registered ber, but non-auto wholesalers and retail­
earlier in the year. Existing home sales ers accumulated inventories at a brisk
had fallen back from September’s high, pace. Strong increases in sales, however,
though the level in November was still kept book-value inventory–sales ratios
noticeably higher than average monthly at or near their recent lows. Motor vehi­
sales in the first half of 2003. cle and parts inventories ended the year
The available data suggested that noticeably above the level at the end of
business purchases of transportation the third quarter.
equipment strengthened in the fourth The international trade deficit in
quarter and that spending on other cap­ November shrank to its lowest level in
ital goods advanced at a moderate about a year. Exports of goods and ser­
pace. Business expenditures on aircraft vices increased to a level not recorded
rebounded noticeably in the fourth quar­ since early 2001, while imports fell
ter, albeit to a level that was still far moderately. Recent data indicated that

170 91st Annual Report, 2004
the pickup in economic activity in the In reaching this decision, the Committee
major foreign industrial countries con­ members generally perceived the upside
tinued in the fourth quarter. Japanese and downside risks to the attainment
exports, machinery orders, and indus­ of sustainable growth for the next few
trial production rose strongly in October quarters to be roughly equal. They also
and November. Euro-area manufactur­ judged that the probability of an unwel­
ing data exhibited increasing strength, come fall in inflation had diminished in
particularly in Germany. In the United recent months and now appeared almost
Kingdom, indicators of business and equal to that of a rise in inflation. Never­
retail sales in December pointed to a theless, with inflation quite low and
maintained expansion. And Canadian resource use slack, the Committee
employment and sales data were strong believed that policy accommodation
in the fourth quarter, with the housing could be maintained for a considerable
sector continuing to make a significant period.
contribution to growth. The Committee’s decision at the
Prices of consumer goods and ser­ December meeting to keep its target
vices other than food and energy contin­ for the federal funds rate at 1 percent
ued to decelerate through the end of appeared to have been fully anticipated
2003. Overall consumer prices were flat, in financial markets, and interest
on balance, over the past three months, rate futures for the first half of 2004
as a small increase in core prices and a were essentially unchanged after the
large rise in food prices were offset by a announcement. But futures rates for the
sizable drop in energy prices. Over the second half of the year rose a few basis
year, the consumer price index posted points, presumably in response to the
a moderate increase that was noticeably Committee’s assessment that the prob­
below that in the previous year. Core ability of an unwelcome decline in infla­
consumer prices decelerated more tion had fallen in recent months to a
sharply and rose only slightly over the level almost equal to that of a rise in
year. Producer prices for finished goods inflation. Subsequently, however, the
were up moderately over the year, and release of the minutes for the October
the advance was substantially above that FOMC meeting, which indicated that at
over the previous year. The rise last year that time the Committee was concerned
was due almost entirely to substantial about the possibility of persistent slack
increases in food and energy prices as arising from rapid productivity growth,
core producer prices rose only a little and the publication of surprisingly mod­
after having edged down over 2002. est growth in employment in December
With regard to labor costs, the average led most market participants to push
hourly earnings of production or non- back the date of the expected onset of
supervisory workers on private nonfarm tightening by several months to some
payrolls rose modestly in the twelve time in the fall. Reflecting the change in
months ending in December, an increase policy expectations, intermediate- and
somewhat below that over 2002. longer-term nominal Treasury yields
At its meeting on December 9, 2003, declined substantially over the inter-
the Federal Open Market Committee meeting period. Yields on inflation-
(FOMC) adopted a directive that called indexed debt fell by nearly as much,
for maintaining conditions in reserve suggesting that the drop in nominal
markets consistent with keeping the yields owed more to lower real interest
federal funds rate at around 1 percent. rates than to reduced inflation compen­

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, January 171
sation. Yields on investment-grade and able financing conditions. Some slight
most speculative-grade securities moved downward pressure on core consumer
down by about the same amount as price inflation was anticipated in the
Treasury yields. Major equity indexes forecast given the ongoing slack in labor
rose strongly in response to the declines and product markets.
in yields and positive news about the In the Committee’s discussion of cur­
outlook for profits. rent and prospective economic develop­
The exchange value of the dollar, as ments, the members commented that the
measured by the major currencies index, information that had become available
declined moderately on net over the since the December meeting had tended
intermeeting period. Ongoing investor to validate their earlier assessment that
concerns about the ability of the United the expansion was firmly established
States to finance its current account defi­ and that robust economic growth, under
cit reportedly were again a primary fac­ way since about mid-2003, was likely to
tor exerting pressure on the dollar. continue as the year progressed. Many
M2 fell in December, the fourth con­ emphasized that business expenditures
secutive monthly decline. The decline in now appeared to be on a solid upward
M2 over the fourth quarter was the larg­ trajectory amid widespread reports of
est on record since the start of consistent much improved business sentiment.
data collection in 1959. The weakness Indeed, business expenditures had
was concentrated in liquid deposits and, broadened the sources of significant
to a lesser extent, in retail money market strength in the expansion, which earlier
mutual funds and appeared to be due in had been sustained mainly by house­
large part to the unwinding of a previous hold and government spending. Factors
buildup in deposits associated with underlying a favorable outlook for eco­
heavy mortgage refinancing activity and nomic activity continued to include
to portfolio shifts by households into stimulative fiscal and monetary policies,
equities. accommodative conditions in financial
The staff forecast prepared for this markets, and the positive effects of a
meeting indicated that the momentum in strong uptrend in productivity on busi­
economic activity that had built up in ness investment incentives and, with
the second half of 2003 would carry some lag, on household incomes. The
over into the first half of the current year members nonetheless expressed disap­
and that the ongoing gains in spending pointment that the acceleration in eco­
and production would soon result in a nomic activity had thus far failed to
more visible improvement in labor mar­ generate significant strengthening in
ket conditions. The considerable stimu­ employment, though they pointed to a
lus being provided by fiscal and mone­ number of positive signs in labor mar­
tary policies was expected to keep kets. Given their expectations of persist­
aggregate demand on a solid uptrend. In ing above-trend economic growth, they
addition, improving labor market condi­ saw increasing demand for workers as a
tions and the effects of strong produc­ likely prospect going forward. Regard­
tivity growth on permanent income were ing the outlook for inflation, members
projected to support household spend­ observed that wide margins of slack in
ing, while business investment spending labor and product markets continued to
was seen as strengthening in response hold down wages and prices, especially
to the acceleration in business output, given the concurrent strength in produc­
swelling profits, and continued favor­ tivity. Core consumer inflation appeared

172 91st Annual Report, 2004
to have drifted lower recently, and a the improved financial condition of
number of members mentioned the many business firms, the general avail­
possibility of a modest further decline in ability of financing on favorable terms,
such inflation from its current subdued and the temporary tax incentive on
level. Over the year ahead, however, the expenditures for new equipment. Anec­
members generally anticipated little net dotal reports from business contacts
change in consumer price inflation. about capital spending plans were
In keeping with the practice at meet­ indicative of appreciable further accel­
ings preceding the Federal Reserve’s eration in business expenditures on a
semi-annual report to the Congress on widening range of capital goods. While
the economy and monetary policy, the many contacts indicated that replace­
members of the Board of Governors and ment demand or the cost-saving oppor­
the presidents of the Federal Reserve tunities provided by more productive
Banks had provided individual projec­ new equipment were still the driving
tions of the growth of GDP, the rate of factors in guiding investment decisions,
unemployment, and consumer price there were more reports of investment
inflation for the year 2004. The fore­ spending to expand capacity.
casts pointed to a continuation of rela­ The members also viewed business
tively vigorous growth in economic inventory investment as likely to pro­
activity, some further decline in unem­ vide some support to the economic
ployment, and a quite low rate of infla­ expansion over the year ahead. Business
tion. Specifically, the forecasts of the inventories were at exceptionally low
expansion in real GDP between the levels in relation to sales, and if further
fourth quarter of 2003 and the fourth brisk growth in demand broadly in line
quarter of 2004 had a central tendency with current forecasts materialized this
of 41⁄
2
to 5 percent and a full range of year, business firms could be expected
4 to 51⁄
2
percent. The projections of the to make commensurate additions to
civilian unemployment rate in the fourth their inventories. Indeed, inventories
quarter of 2004 were all in a range of appeared to have turned up in the fourth
51⁄
4
to 51⁄
2
percent. Forecasts of con­ quarter after declining on balance earlier
sumer price inflation for the year, as in 2003 as businesses evidently became
measured by the PCE chain-type price more confident that increases in their
index, were centered in a range of 1 to sales would be sustained.
11⁄
4
percent, with a full range of 1 to While business expenditures had
11⁄
2
percent. turned up, employers had continued to
In their discussion of developments display a high degree of caution in
across the nation, members emphasized hiring new workers. Employment had
growing indications of rising business trended up since mid-2003 after a pro­
confidence and, despite persisting soft­ tracted period of job losses, but the gains
ness in a number of industries, more were significantly weaker than was typi­
widespread signs of increasing business cal at similar stages of earlier business
spending for equipment and software cycles. A key factor that had tended
and for inventories. The members cited to hold down hiring was the continuing
a variety of factors that pointed to a ability of business firms to meet increas­
further pickup in business capital expen­ ing demand by improving productivity
ditures over the coming year, includ­ with existing workforces rather than
ing the strength in new orders and ship­ hiring new workers. Against this back­
ments, increasing profits and cash flow, ground, labor markets continued to be

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, January 173
described as soft in most areas, albeit jected to diminish under existing leg­
with more signs of at least modest islation. In this regard, one member
improvement. In this regard, members questioned whether a robust expansion
referred to positive developments such would be sustained once the fiscal
as the decline in initial claims and the impulse was removed. Some members
rise in aggregate hours worked in the expressed concern about the longer-run
fourth quarter. Looking ahead, the mem­ prospects for large federal deficits and
bers saw considerably faster growth their implications for the future perfor­
in employment as a likely prospect in mance of the economy.
the context of further strengthening in In their comments about the inter­
aggregate demand and expectations of national economy, members noted that
some slowing in the growth of produc­ the strengthening in economic activity
tivity from its extraordinary pace in abroad and the decline in the foreign
recent quarters. Several emphasized, exchange value of the dollar had boosted
however, that the timing and extent of exports. Even so, the ongoing strength
the improvement in employment were in imports was still producing a widen­
subject to considerable uncertainty. ing trade deficit, and net exports were
The household sector was continu­ expected to be a small arithmetic drag
ing to supply major impetus to the on domestic economic activity over the
expansion. Household spending was year ahead. Some members indicated
benefiting from stimulative fiscal and that they were concerned about the
monetary policies, the wealth effects of implications of the nation’s rapidly
rising real estate and equity prices, and growing external debt for domestic
increased consumer confidence about financial markets and the economy over
the economic outlook. Members noted time.
that retailers in many parts of the coun­ In the Committee’s discussion of
try reported solid sales during the holi­ the outlook for inflation, the members
day period. With respect to the outlook agreed that increases in core consumer
for overall consumer spending, it was prices were likely to remain muted
suggested that the elevated growth of this year, with ongoing strength in the
productivity could be expected to raise expansion only gradually reducing the
incomes over time and thereby help to current output gap and anticipated gains
buttress consumption even as the stimu­ in productivity exerting downward pres­
lus from earlier tax cuts faded. Residen­ sure on costs and prices. Some members
tial construction activity remained at a commented, however, that the rela­
high level, evidently supported in part tionship between the output gap and
by recent declines in mortgage interest inflation was quite loose and that the
rates. Contacts in the housing industry outlook for productivity remained
indicated that they expected a high level uncertain. Accordingly, while members
of construction activity in 2004, though agreed that changes in core consumer
perhaps not as robust as in 2003. price inflation were likely to be limited,
Fiscal policy was providing consider­ there was some divergence of opinion
able stimulus to the economy and would about the most probable direction. In the
continue to do so in the first part of this view of many, some modest further dis­
year, reflecting the large tax refunds inflation appeared to be the most likely
anticipated as a result of overwithhold­ prospect. A few members noted that
ings in 2003. Beyond the nearer term, such disinflation, if it was associated
however, the fiscal stimulus was pro­ with rapid growth in productivity, could

174 91st Annual Report, 2004
be viewed as non-threatening. More­ accommodative policy stance, but for
over, the expected strength in aggre­ now they judged that it was desirable to
gate demand would curb the extent of take risks on the side of assuring the
disinflation over time. A few members rapid elimination of economic slack.
expressed the differing view that core With regard to the wording of the
consumer prices might well edge up Committee’s press statement to be
over the course of the year in light of the released shortly after the meeting, mem­
considerable stimulus stemming from bers discussed at some length the desir­
current monetary and fiscal policies and ability of retaining a reference from ear­
the possibility that the expected pickup lier statements to the prospect that an
in economic activity and employment, accommodative policy could be main­
especially if it were on the high side of tained ‘‘for a considerable period.’’ The
current forecasts, would be associated existing language had been explicitly
with slower growth in productivity. The qualified at the December meeting by
evidence pointing to the possibility of tying it to low inflation and slack in
an uptick in inflation was still quite resource use, thereby underscoring the
limited, but some members noted that in notion that a move away from the cur­
addition to sizable advances in the prices rent degree of policy accommodation
of many commodities including oil, would depend on economic conditions
reports from business contacts indicated rather than simply on the passage of
that a few firms had been able to raise time. All the members agreed that a
their selling prices and maintain them change in wording was desirable, not
at higher levels in an effort to pass on to signal a policy tightening move in
increases in costs. Overall, however, the near term, but rather to increase the
the pricing power of business firms Committee’s flexibility to take such an
remained quite limited. action when it was deemed to be desir­
In the Committee’s discussion of pol­ able and to underline that any such
icy for the intermeeting period ahead, decision would be made on the basis of
all the members favored an unchanged evolving economic conditions. How­
policy stance that was directed toward ever, some differences of opinion arose
maintaining reserve conditions consis­ with regard to the specific proposal
tent with a target federal funds rate of under consideration, namely to remove
1 percent. While the members were per­ the reference to ‘‘considerable period’’
suaded that a relatively vigorous eco­ and to substitute one referring to
nomic expansion was now firmly estab­ ‘‘patience.’’ Those who fully endorsed
lished and was likely at some point to the proposal believed that the new word­
call for a move toward a more neutral ing conveyed important information
policy stance, they concluded that such about the Committee’s strategy in an
an adjustment was not warranted under environment of price stability and eco­
current circumstances. In this regard nomic slack and under those circum­
they stressed that unused labor and other stances was unlikely to have outsized
resources remained substantial, that effects in financial markets. A number
inflation was at a very low level, and of members commented that expecta­
that inflation was not expected to change tions of sustained policy accommo­
appreciably in either direction over the dation appeared to have contributed to
year ahead. Members acknowledged valuations in financial markets that left
that there were risks in maintaining what little room for downside risks, and the
might eventually prove to be an overly change in wording might prompt those

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, March 175
markets to adjust more appropriately to Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian-
changing economic circumstances in the alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this
action: None.
future. A few members, while express­
ing agreement with respect to the merits
It was agreed that the next meeting of
of a language change, nonetheless pre­
the Committee would be held on Tues­
ferred to drop the reference to a ‘‘con­
day, March 16, 2004.
siderable period’’ entirely without sub­
The meeting adjourned at 1:45 p.m.
stituting a reference to the Committee’s
on January 28, 2004.
ability to be patient. In this view, even
the replacement language would tend to
Vincent R. Reinhart
shape expectations in ways that could
Secretary
complicate the conduct of policy, and
with the economy in a strong uptrend,
the Committee no longer needed to uti­ Meeting Held on
lize such special language. March 16, 2004
At the conclusion of the meeting, the
A meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee voted to authorize and direct
Committee was held in the offices of
the Federal Reserve Bank of New York,
the Board of Governors of the Fed­
until it was instructed otherwise, to
eral Reserve System in Washington,
execute transactions in the System
D.C., on Tuesday, March 16, 2004, at
Account in accordance with the follow­
9:00 a.m.
ing domestic policy directive:
Present:
The Federal Open Market Committee
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
seeks monetary and financial conditions that
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
will foster price stability and promote sus­
Mr. Bernanke
tainable growth in output. To further its long-
Ms. Bies
run objectives, the Committee in the imme­
Mr. Ferguson
diate future seeks conditions in reserve
Mr. Gramlich
markets consistent with maintaining the
Mr. Hoenig
federal funds rate at an average of around
Mr. Kohn
1 percent.
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Olson
The vote encompassed approval of
Ms. Pianalto
the paragraph below for inclusion in the Mr. Poole
press statement to be released shortly
after the meeting: Messrs. McTeer, Moskow, Santomero,
and Stern, Alternate Members of
The Committee perceives that the upside the Federal Open Market
and downside risks to the attainment of sus­ Committee
tainable growth for the next few quarters are
roughly equal. The probability of an unwel­ Messrs. Broaddus, Guynn, and Parry,
come fall in inflation has diminished in Presidents of the Federal Reserve
recent months and now appears almost equal Banks of Richmond, Atlanta, and
to that of a rise in inflation. With inflation San Francisco respectively
quite low and resource use slack, the Com­
mittee believes that it can be patient in Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
removing its policy accommodation. Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Votes for this action: Messrs. Green- Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
span, Geithner, Bernanke, Ms. Bies, Ms. Johnson, Economist
Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig, Mr. Stockton, Economist

176 91st Annual Report, 2004
Messrs. Connors, Fuhrer, Howard, Mr. Kahn, Vice President, Federal
Madigan, Rasche, Sniderman, Reserve Bank of Kansas City
Slifman, and Wilcox, Associate
Economists
The Manager of the System Open
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Market Account reported on recent
Market Account developments in foreign exchange mar­
kets. There were no open market opera­
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division
tions in foreign currencies for the Sys­
of Research and Statistics,
tem’s account in the period since the
Board of Governors
previous meeting.
Messrs. Struckmeyer and Oliner, The Manager also reported on devel­
Associate Directors, Division opments in domestic financial markets
of Research and Statistics, and on System open market transactions
Board of Governors
in government securities and securities
Messrs. Clouse, Freeman, and issued or fully guaranteed by federal
Whitesell, Deputy Associate agencies during the period January 28,
Directors, Divisions of Monetary 2004, through March 15, 2004. By
Affairs, International Finance, and unanimous vote, the Committee ratified
Monetary Affairs respectively,
these transactions.
Board of Governors
The information reviewed at this
Mr. English, Assistant Director, meeting suggested that economic activ­
Division of Monetary Affairs, ity continued to expand at a solid pace
Board of Governors in early 2004. Consumer spending
growth appeared to have picked up
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to
somewhat, and activity in the housing
the Board, Office of Board
Members, Board of Governors market remained at high levels. In the
business sector, spending for equipment
Mr. Sack, Section Chief, Division and software was apparently advancing
of Monetary Affairs,
vigorously, and firms were adding
Board of Governors
modestly to their inventories. Still, the
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, increases in economic activity had not
Division of Monetary Affairs, yet generated sizable gains in employ­
Board of Governors ment. Core consumer price inflation
remained low, and expectations of
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat
future inflation continued to be subdued.
Assistant, Division of Monetary
The January and February employ­
Affairs, Board of Governors
ment reports depicted a labor market
Mr. Moore, First Vice President, that was slow to pick up momentum.
Federal Reserve Bank of The modest gains posted in private non­
San Francisco
farm payrolls over the period were
smaller than had been expected by most
Messrs. Eisenbeis, Evans, Judd, Lacker,
Mses. Mester and Perelmuter, forecasters. Employment in the manu­
Messrs. Rolnick, Rosenblum, and facturing sector, which had fallen con­
Steindel, Senior Vice Presidents, tinually for over three years, was essen­
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta,
tially unchanged in February, while
Chicago, San Francisco,
employment in other sectors showed
Richmond, Philadelphia,
New York, Minneapolis, Dallas, mixed changes. Average weekly hours
and New York respectively of production or nonsupervisory work­

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, March 177
ers edged above the average level of sentiment remained above the levels
the fourth quarter of 2003. Despite the seen during most of 2003.
weakness in employment, the unem­ Activity in the housing market mod­
ployment rate in January and Febru­ erated in January and February from its
ary came in below its fourth-quarter elevated pace in the fourth quarter.
level. Single-family housing starts and permits
Industrial production moved up stepped down, although both measures
briskly in January and February fol­ remained above their average levels of
lowing strong increases in the fourth the first three quarters of 2003. Housing
quarter. These gains in production were starts in the multifamily sector slipped
realized across a wide set of industries. only slightly from the fourth quarter
High-tech industries, including semi­ pace, even though vacancy rates reached
conductors, computers, and communi­ a record high level in the fourth quarter.
cations equipment, posted particularly Sales of new and existing homes slowed
strong advances, while the production of in January, but this change retraced only
motor vehicles and the output of other a small part of the extraordinary run-up
manufacturing sectors were also strong. in home sales that began last spring.
Outside the manufacturing sector, power Home prices continued to rise briskly.
generation by utilities surged in January Spending on capital goods had
but fell back in February in response to advanced at a vigorous pace in the
outsized swings in average temperatures fourth quarter and appeared to be con­
during those months. Capacity utiliza­ tinuing that growth early this year.
tion continued to move higher in Janu­ Spending by businesses was supported
ary and February, although it remained by increases in their sales and the con­
below its longer-run average. tinuation of strong cash flows and a
Consumer spending growth in recent low user cost of capital. Nominal ship­
months appeared to pick up somewhat ments of computing and communication
from its pace in the fourth quarter of equipment moved up sharply in recent
2003. Retail sales rose briskly, on aver­ months, as did shipments outside the
age, in January and February, and spend­ high-tech sector. By contrast, business
ing on services was up in January (the investment in transportation equipment
most recent month for which data were was mixed. Data for new orders of non­
available). In contrast, purchases of defense capital goods excluding aircraft
motor vehicles slipped in January and suggested that the strength in capital
February from the strong pace in the expenditures would continue going for­
fourth quarter. Overall, expenditures ward. As has been the case for some
were supported by sizable gains in time, real spending on private nonresi­
real disposable personal income and dential structures languished, and vacan­
increases in household wealth owing to cies in industrial buildings and office
rising home and equity prices. Dispos­ properties were at high levels.
able income was boosted by significant Real nonfarm inventory investment
growth in private wages and salaries and remained modest in recent months.
by a drop in taxes that was due to the Although manufacturers’ inventories
lower final payments and higher refunds moved higher in January, that increase
associated with last year’s tax cut. Sur­ primarily reflected stockbuilding at pro­
veys indicated that consumer sentiment ducers of petroleum and coal products.
moved higher in January but subse­ Retail inventories also rose in January,
quently fell back. Despite the pullback, as stocks at auto dealers increased;

178 91st Annual Report, 2004
wholesalers accumulated inventories at ished and was almost equal to that of a
a modest pace. Inventory–sales ratios in rise in inflation. With inflation low and
these sectors lingered at or near their resource use slack, the Committee saw
historical lows. no need for tightening policy in the near
The U.S. international trade deficit future. However, to provide additional
rose to a record high level in January. flexibility to adjust monetary policy at a
Exports of goods and services fell, later date once such action was deemed
owing importantly to a drop in agricul­ appropriate given economic develop­
tural exports. Imports edged lower, with ments, the Committee removed from
higher oil imports partly offsetting its post-meeting statement the explicit
declines in most other categories. reference to a ‘‘considerable period’’
Recent data suggested that economic and substituted a statement that con­
activity in major foreign industrial coun­ veyed the sense that it could be patient
tries strengthened outside the euro area, in removing its policy accommodation.
notably including a sizable jump in Although the Committee’s decision at
Japan’s output in the fourth quarter. the January meeting to keep the federal
Growth in the euro area remained tepid. funds rate unchanged had been widely
Core consumer price inflation stayed anticipated, the changes in the wording
very low in early 2004. Over the twelve of the accompanying statement elicited
months ending in January, the increase a sharp reaction in financial markets.
in core consumer prices was around Investors moved up the date when they
1 percent—about 3⁄
4
percentage point expected policy tightening to com­
below the increase over the preceding mence, resulting in a jump in Treasury
twelve months. Total consumer price yields. Over the balance of the inter-
inflation, however, was boosted in Janu­ meeting period, however, the Chair­
ary by a surge in energy prices. Incom­ man’s testimony on monetary policy and
ing information on trends in labor costs data on nonfarm payroll employment
were more mixed. The average hourly with a weakish cast persuaded investors
earnings of production or nonsuper­ that policy tightening was still some
visory workers on private nonfarm ways off. Treasury yields declined con­
payrolls rose modestly over the twelve siderably in response and ended the
months ending in February, decelerating intermeeting period lower, on balance.
from its year-earlier pace. By contrast, Yields on inflation-indexed securities
the employment cost index for hourly also fell, leaving measures of inflation
compensation in private industry grew a compensation little changed.
bit faster over the twelve months ending Yields on investment-grade bonds
in December than over the year-earlier generally moved in tandem with those
period. on Treasuries over the intermeeting
At its meeting on January 27–28, period, but spreads on high-yield bonds
2004, the Federal Open Market Com­ widened as investors reassessed credit
mittee decided to leave its target for the risks in light of the negative tone of
federal funds rate unchanged at 1 per­ some incoming economic data. The
cent. The Committee also retained its disappointing employment data and
assessment that the upside and down­ renewed concerns about terrorism con­
side risks to the attainment of sustain­ tributed to a decline in broad equity
able growth were roughly equal as well price indexes. Technology-related
as its judgment that the probability of an issues, which had registered very large
unwelcome fall in inflation had dimin­ gains over the preceding year or so,

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, March 179
fell more sharply. The foreign exchange economic activity still seemed to be
value of the dollar against other major increasing at a solid pace, though per­
currencies declined through the middle haps not quite as quickly as some mem­
of February but subsequently rebounded bers had anticipated at the time of
to end the intermeeting period higher. the January meeting. Investment spend­
After four consecutive months of ing had continued to advance, and the
decline, M2 rose slightly in January and manufacturing sector, which had lagged
accelerated markedly in February. The the rest of the economy earlier in the
effects of mortgage refinancing, which expansion, had extended recent gains.
had depressed M2 growth in the second Residential construction activity was
half of last year, appeared to wane, down somewhat from the very high lev­
allowing the expansion in nominal els posted late last year, but increases
income to show through to M2 growth. in household wealth and the effects of
The staff forecast prepared for this last year’s tax cuts continued to buoy
meeting indicated that economic activ­ consumer spending. Despite the gains
ity would continue to expand at a solid in spending and production, however,
pace through 2005. Monetary policy is employment growth had been disap­
expected to support growth over the pro­ pointing. While job losses had moder­
jection period, and fiscal policy is antici­ ated, hiring had yet to strengthen, hold­
pated to remain accommodative through ing down net increases in employment.
2004. In addition, structural produc­ Nonetheless, the breadth of the expan­
tivity growth is projected to remain sion was seen as providing considerable
substantial this year and next. Strong assurance of its sustainability, and Com­
advances in real disposable income were mittee members generally expected that
expected to keep consumer spending accommodative monetary policy, favor­
on a solid upward trajectory. Business able financial market conditions, and,
spending on equipment and software at least in the near term, fiscal stimu­
was seen as increasing briskly as a result lus would continue to foster a pace of
of sizable profits, an improving outlook output growth that exceeded that of
for demand, and continued favorable its potential. Although economic slack
financing conditions. Also, inventory likely would be declining, it was
investment was anticipated to rise expected to be a little higher than
gradually as businesses became more previously had been anticipated. Prices
convinced that final demand was for energy, commodities, and non-oil
expanding along a sustainable track. The imports were rising, however, and some
pace of economic expansion was fore­ business contacts had reported seeing a
casted to be sufficient to reduce resource return of ‘‘pricing power.’’ On balance,
slack over this year and next, although inflation was expected to remain near its
the employment data received over the current low level.
intermeeting period indicated that this In their discussion of economic devel­
process would begin from a higher rate opments across the nation, a number of
of unused resources than had been previ­ Committee members noted some slip­
ously expected. Core inflation was pro­ page in business and consumer confi­
jected to remain low over the forecast dence from the high levels reached late
period. last year. While business contacts in
In the Committee’s discussion of cur­ some regions remained optimistic about
rent and prospective economic develop­ prospects for their sales and planned to
ments, the members noted that overall increase investment and, in some cases,

180 91st Annual Report, 2004
employment, firms in other parts of the investing primarily to replace old equip­
country had become somewhat more ment or to reduce costs, but remained
uncertain about the pace of the expan­ hesitant to expand capacity. The com­
sion going forward. Those firms, as mercial real estate sector remained
a result, were more wary about com­ weak, on balance, although some mem­
mitting to new investment plans or bers suggested that market conditions
increased hiring. Financial markets also were stabilizing and, in a few cases,
seemed a little less positive about the even beginning to improve.
outlook, with stock prices lower and Committee members noted that activ­
some risk spreads wider than at the time ity in the housing sector, while still
of the last meeting. The reasons for the quite elevated, had fallen back from
reduced optimism were not entirely its extraordinary pace of late last year.
clear but may have included higher However, some of the moderation may
energy and commodity prices as well have owed to the effects of severe win­
as renewed concerns about terrorism. ter weather rather than more lasting
Some members also pointed to the per­ influences, and the recent decline in
sistent weakness in employment, which mortgage interest rates was expected to
might be seen as reducing the odds that support the housing sector going for­
household spending would continue ward. Reports from some contacts sug­
to expand briskly once the stimulative gested that speculative forces might be
effects of tax cuts waned. Lingering boosting housing demand in some parts
business caution likely accounted for a of the country, with concomitant effects
good deal of the lag in job creation, but on prices, suggesting the possibility that
some members also pointed to a number house prices might be moving into the
of other factors that might be restraining high end of the range that could be
hiring, including ongoing opportunities consistent with fundamentals.
to increase efficiency through organiza­ Consumer spending outside the auto
tional changes and new investments, the sector had remained strong, with data
effects on labor costs of increases in the and retail contacts generally suggesting
costs of benefits, and, in some selected continued growth in sales this year.
industries and regions, a shortage of Committee members noted that sales
job candidates with appropriate skills. had been bolstered by rising asset prices
The extent and duration of the result­ and the effects of last year’s tax cuts on
ing restraint on hiring were difficult refunds and final payments. By contrast,
to assess, however, and the Committee sales of motor vehicles had fallen back
continued to expect employment growth noticeably, reflecting in part reductions
to pick up as the expansion progressed. in incentives. However, members antici­
In their comments about demand in pated that sales would pick up again,
key sectors of the economy, members partly in response to an anticipated
indicated that investment spending had rebound in incentives. Looking forward,
continued to expand at a robust pace. gains in employment and the pass-
Members anticipated vigorous growth through of higher productivity to wages
in investment outlays going forward, and salaries were also expected to boost
supported by rapid productivity growth, consumer spending, even as the stimu­
high profits and cash flow, and accom­ lus to growth from tax cuts faded and
modative financial markets. Despite this increases in home and equity prices
generally upbeat assessment, a number likely slowed from their rapid pace in
of members reported that firms were recent quarters.

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, March 181
The Committee anticipated that gov­ in slack accompanied by higher unit
ernment spending would provide some labor costs and associated pressures on
further support for aggregate demand prices. Other members were less certain
going forward. The budget pressures that inflation had leveled out. Recent
that had constrained state and local gov­ price trends were not clear, with some
ernment expenditures of late were eas­ measures of core inflation still declin­
ing in some cases, and federal outlays ing. Increases in commodity prices
were expected to rise. Fiscal policy was remained limited to a few selected
seen as providing less stimulus to aggre­ industries, and with the persistence of
gate demand in 2005 than this year, but slack in labor and product markets, core
the federal budget deficit was expected inflation might well edge lower once
to remain substantial. any transitory influences had ebbed.
In their remarks concerning the exter­ Moreover, if productivity were to
nal sector of the economy, members expand at a rapid pace rather than slow­
cited the decline in the value of the ing, unit labor costs could fall, putting
dollar on foreign exchange markets downward pressure on prices.
since the middle of last year and In the Committee’s discussion of pol­
stronger economic growth in many of icy for the intermeeting period, all the
our trading partners as factors boost­ members favored the retention of the
ing the demand for exports in a variety current target rate of 1 percent for the
of industries. While exports were likely federal funds rate. This preference for
to continue to advance, the value of an unaltered stance of policy was based
U.S. imports was expected to rise as on the absence of significant changes
well, implying continued very large cur­ in economic conditions or in the mem­
rent account deficits. Some Committee bers’ basic assessment of the outlook
members noted that opportunities to cut since the January meeting. To be sure,
costs had led some of their business some of the incoming information—
contacts to consider moving production notably with regard to labor market
abroad. developments—had been somewhat dis­
In their review of the outlook for appointing, but the Committee contin­
prices, members generally anticipated ued to see the conditions in place for
that core inflation would remain near further solid economic growth. Simi­
current low levels, with output growth larly, despite the rise in energy and com­
only gradually eliminating slack in labor modity prices and reports of increased
and goods markets and strong growth pricing power in some sectors, many
in productivity limiting increases in unit Committee members commented that
labor costs. Some members thought that persisting slack in labor and output mar­
core inflation had stabilized and was kets would keep inflation low. In these
unlikely to move lower. Increases in the circumstances, the current accommoda­
prices of energy, other commodities, and tive stance of monetary policy remained
non-oil imports, as well as reports from appropriate. Some members, while sup­
some business contacts that higher costs porting an unchanged policy at this
were increasingly being passed through meeting, nonetheless emphasized that
to prices, suggested that the downtrend the maintenance of a very accommoda­
in inflation had ended. Moreover, if, as tive monetary policy over an extended
some members thought likely, produc­ period in concert with a stimulative
tivity growth slowed as employment fiscal policy called for careful attention
picked up, the result could be reductions to the possible emergence of inflation­

182 91st Annual Report, 2004
ary pressures. And, while adjustments the post-meeting statement would be to
in financial markets to low rates had update the descriptions of the economic
generally been consistent with the usual expansion and labor market conditions
operation of the monetary transmission in light of the information received over
mechanism, some members were con­ the intermeeting period.
cerned that keeping monetary policy At the conclusion of the discussion,
stimulative for so long might be encour­ the Committee voted to authorize and
aging increased leverage and excessive direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
risk-taking. Such developments could York, until it was instructed otherwise,
heighten the potential for the emergence to execute transactions in the System
of financial and economic instability Account in accordance with the follow­
when policy tightening proved neces­ ing domestic policy directive.
sary in the future. At present, however,
the persistence of low inflation coupled
The Federal Open Market Committee
with soft labor markets underscored seeks monetary and financial conditions that
the desirability of a monetary policy will foster price stability and promote sus­
strategy characterized by continued tainable growth in output. To further its long-
run objectives, the Committee in the imme­
patience.
diate future seeks conditions in reserve
In the Committee’s discussion of its
markets consistent with maintaining the
statement to be released shortly after federal funds rate at an average of around
this meeting, the members saw merit in 1 percent.
not changing the characterization of the
risks to the outlook for inflation and
The vote encompassed approval of
economic activity. Many members held
the paragraph below for inclusion in the
that a case could be made for moving to
Committee’s statement to be released
a balanced risk assessment with regard
shortly after the meeting:
to the outlook for inflation, with a
number of them expressing a marginal
preference for such a change. However, The Committee perceives that the upside
and downside risks to the attainment of sus­
other members thought the evidence for
tainable growth for the next few quarters are
a balanced risk assessment was not yet roughly equal. The probability of an unwel­
compelling and pointed out that with come fall in inflation has diminished in
inflation quite low and slack in labor recent months and now appears almost equal
and output markets likely to persist for a to that of a rise in inflation. With inflation
quite low and resource use slack, the Com­
while longer, the costs to the economy
mittee believes that it can be patient in
associated with a further decline in infla­
removing its policy accommodation.
tion likely outweighed those associated
with a comparable increase. While many
Votes for this action: Messrs. Green-
viewed it as a close call, all members
span, Geithner, Bernanke, Ms. Bies,
indicated that they could support a pro­ Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig,
posal to retain the existing wording Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian-
involving a slight tilt toward the possi­ alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this
action: None.
bility of some further disinflation. The
members also agreed on the desirability
of retaining the assessment that the risks It was agreed that the next meeting of
with regard to the outlook for economic the Committee would be held on Tues­
growth were balanced. Accordingly, it day, May 4, 2004.
was agreed that the only changes in The meeting adjourned at 1:00 p.m.

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, May 183
Notation Vote Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
By notation vote completed on
March 18, 2004, the Committee unani­ Messrs. Connors, Fuhrer, Hakkio,
mously approved the minutes of the Howard, Madigan, Rasche,
Struckmeyer, Tracy, and Wilcox,
meeting of the Federal Open Market
Associate Economists
Committee held on January 27–28,
2004.
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open
Market Account
Vincent R. Reinhart
Secretary Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division
of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Meeting Held on
Messrs. Slifman and Oliner, Associate
May 4, 2004
Directors, Division of Research
and Statistics, Board of Governors
A meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee was held in the offices of
Messrs. Clouse and Whitesell, Deputy
the Board of Governors of the Fed­
Associate Directors, Division of
eral Reserve System in Washing­ Monetary Affairs, Board of
ton, D.C., on Tuesday, May 4, 2004, at Governors
9:00 a.m.
Messrs. English and Sheets, Assistant
Present: Directors, Divisions of Monetary
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman Affairs and International Finance
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman respectively, Board of Governors
Mr. Bernanke
Ms. Bies Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division
Mr. Ferguson of Research and Statistics,
Mr. Gramlich Board of Governors
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the
Ms. Minehan
Board, Office of Board Members,
Mr. Olson
Board of Governors
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Poole
Mr. Bassett, Economist, Division
of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Messrs. McTeer, Moskow, Santomero,
Governors
and Stern, Alternate Members
of the Federal Open Market
Committee Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst,
Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Messrs. Broaddus and Guynn,
Presidents of the Federal Reserve
Banks of Richmond and Atlanta Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat
respectively Assistant, Division of Monetary
Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary Messrs. Connolly and Moore, First
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary Vice Presidents, Federal
Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel Reserve Banks of Boston and
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel San Francisco respectively

184 91st Annual Report, 2004
Messrs. Eisenbeis, Evans, Goodfriend, was taken at this meeting because of the
Judd, Ms. Mester, and provision that each party must provide
Mr. Rolnick, Senior Vice
six months prior notice of an intention
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
to terminate its participation.
of Atlanta, Chicago, Richmond,
San Francisco, Philadelphia, and The Manager also reported on devel­
Minneapolis respectively opments in domestic financial markets
and on System open market transactions
Mr. Altig, Ms. Hargraves, and in government securities and securities
Mr. Koenig, Vice Presidents,
issued or fully guaranteed by federal
Federal Reserve Banks of
agencies during the period March 16,
Cleveland, New York, and Dallas
respectively 2004, through May 3, 2004. By unani­
mous vote, the Committee ratified these
By unanimous vote, the minutes of transactions.
the meeting of the Federal Open Market The information reviewed at this
Committee held on March 16, 2004, meeting suggested that the economy
were approved. expanded at a rapid pace in the first
By unanimous vote, Joseph S. Tracy quarter. Consumer spending and the
was elected to serve as associate econo­ housing market continued to exhibit
mist until the first regularly scheduled strength. Business fixed investment
meeting of the Committee after Decem­ grew smartly, reflecting increased out­
ber 31, 2004, with the understanding lays for equipment and software that
that in the event of the discontinuance more than offset a significant fall in
of his official connection with a Federal investment in nonresidential structures.
Reserve Bank or with the Board of Gov­ The labor market displayed further signs
ernors, he would cease to have any offi­ of improvement during the quarter,
cial connection with the Committee. capped by a significant increase in pri­
The Manager of the System Open vate payrolls in March. Recent increases
Market Account reported on recent in the prices of imports and commodi­
developments in foreign exchange mar­ ties showed through to a pickup in core
kets. There were no open market opera­ consumer price inflation during the first
tions in foreign currencies for the Sys­ quarter, although some of the categories
tem’s account in the period since the that registered large gains had posted
previous meeting. unusually small increases earlier.
By unanimous vote, the Committee The labor market showed renewed
voted to extend for one year beginning vigor during the first quarter. The
in mid-December 2004 the reciprocal growth in payroll employment during
currency (‘‘swap’’) arrangements with March pushed the average monthly gain
the Bank of Canada and the Bank of for the first quarter as a whole well
Mexico. The arrangement with the Bank above that of the fourth quarter of last
of Canada is in the amount of $2 billion year. Hiring during the quarter was
equivalent and that with the Bank of widespread across industries, with large
Mexico in the amount of $3 billion increases in construction, retail trade,
equivalent. Both arrangements are asso­ and business and nonbusiness services.
ciated with the Federal Reserve’s par­ Net job losses in manufacturing, which
ticipation in the North American Frame­ had waned during the winter, reportedly
work Agreement. The vote to renew came to an end by March. Some sur­
the System’s participation in the swap veys of business hiring intentions also
arrangements maturing in December suggested renewed strength. However, a

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, May 185
small decline in the average workweek pace of single-family housing starts con­
during March held down the increase in tinued to display appreciable strength.
aggregate hours, which rose at a slightly Sales of new homes jumped to a record
slower pace in the first quarter than in level in March, and sales of existing
the fourth quarter. Moreover, the unem­ homes increased to their highest level
ployment rate ticked up to 5.7 percent in since last September. In the multi­
March, and the labor force participation family sector, construction activity also
rate remained low. remained robust through March, even
Despite a weather-related decline in though the vacancy rate for multifamily
output at utilities during March, the pace units reached a record high in the first
of industrial production quickened dur­ quarter.
ing the first quarter, and the gains were Business fixed investment continued
widespread across industry and market to be supported by favorable underlying
groups. The high-tech sector accounted fundamentals, including increased cor­
for a significant part of the increase, as porate cash flow, a low user cost of
output of computers and semiconduc­ capital, and, at least as judged by sur­
tors rose rapidly. Production of other vey data, increased business confidence
business equipment also increased in the sustainability of the economic
markedly, and indexes for business and expansion. Outlays for equipment and
construction supplies were up notably. software expanded at a vigorous pace in
Motor vehicle assemblies were slightly the first quarter, with the exception of
higher for the first quarter as a whole, spending on transportation equipment.
although they slowed in March. Manu­ Shipments of nondefense capital goods
facturing capacity utilization rose for the excluding aircraft were strong, espe­
second consecutive quarter, but to a rate cially outside the high-tech industries.
well below its long-run average. Avail­ Within the high-tech sectors, rapid
able weekly physical product data for growth of shipments of communications
April were up slightly. equipment offset declines in the com­
Real consumer spending grew at a puters and peripherals category. By
somewhat faster pace in the first quarter contrast, investment in nonresidential
than it had in the fourth quarter. Retail structures fell considerably in the first
sales rose briskly, with strength wide­ quarter, and vacancy rates for industrial
spread across spending categories, while buildings and office properties remained
expenditures on services also posted a high.
substantial increase. Light vehicle sales Real nonfarm inventories increased a
were down slightly for the first quarter bit more in the first quarter than they
as a whole, but they firmed in March. had in the fourth quarter. Motor vehicle
Solid growth in wages and salaries and inventories at the retail and wholesale
an increase in tax refunds generated a levels accounted for the entire increase,
large increase in real disposable per­ while non-auto inventories ran off
sonal income in the first quarter. Mea­ slightly. In particular, manufacturers
sures of consumer confidence were continued to reduce their stocks, though
roughly stable in March and April. at a slower pace than last year. Inven­
Residential housing activity remained tory accumulation lagged growth in
high in the first quarter despite a marked sales and shipments, and the inventory–
rise in mortgage interest rates. Smooth­ sales ratio edged down further.
ing through weather-related swings in The U.S. international trade deficit
the volatile monthly data, the underlying shrank in February from January’s

186 91st Annual Report, 2004
record high, with exports increasing costs, average hourly earnings of pro­
across a range of major categories of duction or nonsupervisory workers on
goods. Economic growth in the major private nonfarm payrolls rose notably
industrialized countries in the first quar­ less for the twelve months ending in
ter was uneven. The economies of Japan March than they had in the year-earlier
and the United Kingdom likely contin­ period. The overall increase in the
ued to expand, though at paces below employment cost index for private
those of late last year. In the euro area, industry for the twelve months ending in
economic indicators were mixed. A March was about the same as that for
moderation of growth in Canada led the the twelve-month period ending a year
Bank of Canada to ease monetary policy earlier, as wages and salaries deceler­
for the third time this year, citing a need ated and benefits accelerated.
to support aggregate demand. Inflation At its meeting on March 16, 2004,
was little changed in Canada and the the Federal Open Market Committee
euro area, but it slipped further in the decided to keep its target for the fed­
United Kingdom. In Japan, consumer eral funds rate unchanged at 1 percent.
prices were about unchanged, while In its announcement of this decision, the
wholesale prices edged up in March Committee indicated that the upside and
relative to their level of a year earlier downside risks to sustainable growth
and posted the first increase on a twelve­ were roughly equal and that the prob­
month basis since July 2000. ability of an unwelcome fall in infla­
In the United States, the core con­ tion had declined further so that it was
sumer price index advanced at a faster almost equal to that of a rise. The Com­
rate in the first quarter than it had in mittee also noted in March that although
the fourth quarter, reflecting the pass- output had continued to expand at a
through of higher energy prices and a solid pace, new hiring had lagged, and
leveling off of goods prices after sizable increases in core consumer prices were
declines last year. The higher goods muted and expected to remain low. As a
price inflation owed, in part, to the result, the Committee determined that it
recent run-up in the prices of non-oil could remain patient in removing its pol­
imports, energy, and other commodities. icy accommodation.
The price index for core personal con­ The Committee’s decision at its
sumption expenditures also rose at a March meeting to leave the intended
faster rate in the first quarter than it had level of the federal funds rate unchanged
late last year. Despite the rise in infla­ had been fully anticipated in financial
tion this year, however, the cumulative markets. However, market participants
increase in the overall consumer price reportedly viewed the accompanying
index for the year ending in March was statement as suggesting that the Com­
somewhat less than the advance for the mittee had a slightly weaker outlook for
twelve months ending in March 2003. In the economy than had been expected,
the year ending in March, the increase and longer-dated futures rates and
in the price index for total personal con­ Treasury yields declined a few basis
sumption expenditures was similar to points after the announcement. In
that of a year earlier. Survey measures response to the generally positive tone
of near-term inflation expectations of economic data—especially the
edged up somewhat in March and April, release of the much stronger-than­
but measures of longer-term expecta­ expected employment report for
tions decreased. With regard to labor March—and congressional testimony by

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, May 187
Chairman Greenspan, investors pushed refinancing boosted liquid deposits. The
market interest rates substantially higher strength was likely offset somewhat by
over the intermeeting period. By the the effects of individual non-withheld
time of the FOMC meeting in early tax payments in April, which were lower
May, quotes on federal funds futures than last year and therefore probably led
contracts suggested that market par­ to a smaller buildup in liquid deposits
ticipants expected policy tightening to than incorporated in the seasonal adjust­
begin sooner than previously anticipated ment factors. Although currency growth
and to proceed at a faster pace once continued to be held down in the first
it began. The revision to policy expec­ quarter by weak demand from abroad, it
tations showed through to interest moved closer to its long-term trend in
rates on nominal Treasury securities, April.
which climbed significantly. Yields on The staff forecast prepared for this
inflation-indexed Treasury securities meeting suggested that the economy
rose almost as much, implying that would continue to expand briskly for the
inflation compensation only edged a rest of 2004 before decelerating some­
little higher. Yields on investment-grade what in 2005 as fiscal policy shifted to a
corporate bonds rose a bit less than slightly restrictive stance. The consider­
those on comparable-maturity Trea­ able monetary and fiscal stimulus this
suries, but risk spreads on below- year and still-strong advances in struc­
investment-grade bonds narrowed sig­ tural productivity were expected to
nificantly as their yields increased by cause businesses to shed still more of
a more modest amount. Major equity the caution they had been exhibiting in
price indexes were about unchanged, investing and hiring. The labor market
as the downward pressure exerted by was projected to show steady improve­
higher interest rates was offset by the ment through the end of 2004, but the
effects of strong earnings reports, forecasted pace of hiring was expected
upward revisions to expected future to slow a little next year as economic
earnings, and other positive economic growth moderated. The staff anticipated
news. that inventories would increase at a
In foreign exchange markets, the dol­ modest rate during the forecast horizon
lar appreciated against most major cur­ as businesses responded to continued
rencies over the intermeeting period, strength in demand. Business spend­
and it also gained against an index of the ing on equipment and software was
currencies of other major U.S. trading expected to remain strong, with the
partners. The dollar fell sharply against expiration of the partial-expensing tax
the yen early in the intermeeting period, provision at the end of 2004 adding
but subsequently about reversed the impetus this year. The rise in mortgage
decline. Market participants attributed rates was not likely to show through
the dollar’s overall gains particularly to demand for housing until the second
to the stronger-than-expected U.S. half of 2004 and was expected to be
economic data and the weaker-than­ partially offset in the longer term by
expected performance of the Canadian rising employment and personal income.
economy and economies in the euro The increases in employment and
area. income were also projected to continue
M2 grew briskly during March and to boost consumer spending. In light of
April as continued low opportunity costs recent increases in some price measures,
and the temporary effects of mortgage the staff anticipated a transitory rise in

188 91st Annual Report, 2004
the pace of core inflation in the near large advances had substantially reduced
term. However, it was expected that the the odds of further disinflation and also
remaining slack in resource utilization had increased their uncertainty about
and strong productivity growth would prospective price trends. Still, most
keep core inflation at a low level over members saw low inflation as the most
the forecast period. likely outcome.
In the Committee’s discussion of cur­ In their comments about key eco­
rent and prospective economic develop­ nomic sectors, a number of members
ments, a number of members noted that pointed to developments that were likely
the outlook for production and employ­ to support increased investment spend­
ment had improved distinctly in the ing going forward. Many business firms
period since the March FOMC meeting. appeared to be experiencing a signifi­
Newly available data as well as com­ cant pickup in demand. Anecdotal infor­
mentary from business contacts almost mation suggested that some manufactur­
uniformly suggested that the expansion ers had seen a notable rebound in orders,
had continued to broaden and had with several members citing, in partic­
become more firmly established. Statis­ ular, stronger demand for high-tech
tical releases confirmed that consumer products as well as for machine tools,
spending was rising at a brisk rate, various types of heavy machinery, and
housing activity remained at a high aircraft. Also, optimism regarding eco­
level, and business fixed investment was nomic prospects among business execu­
growing vigorously. Significantly, the tives seemed to be mounting, no doubt
most recent data also provided evidence prompted in part by the increased
that the pace of hiring had begun to pick demand they were experiencing and
up, a development that was expected to robust growth in profits. Business con­
provide further support to the expansion tacts in several districts had indicated
going forward. Anecdotal information that, as a result of the improved outlook,
gathered from business contacts across they were taking steps to expand their
the nation—particularly commentary capacity to produce, both by starting to
suggesting rising orders, improving con­ augment work forces and by boosting
fidence, and a growing willingness to fixed investment. Committee members
increase payrolls—tended to confirm the generally perceived overall business
data that pointed to increasingly solid fixed investment as accelerating con­
expansion. Prospects for growth contin­ siderably, especially for equipment and
ued to be supported by fiscal policy, software. In contrast, investment in non­
which was expected to remain stimula­ residential structures remained sluggish,
tive through 2004, and by the effects of as vacancy rates in many markets were
monetary policy accommodation. Over­ elevated and considerable excess capac­
all, Committee members were now more ity persisted in many production plants.
convinced that robust growth would be Drilling, however, was said to be
sustained, and most likely at a pace that strengthening in response to high oil and
would be adequate to make appreciable gas prices.
headway in narrowing margins of unuti­ While Committee members saw an
lized resources. Regarding the outlook overall brightening in the outlook for
for inflation, members took particular business fixed investment, a number of
note of recent data pointing to jumps policymakers commented that some of
in consumer and producer prices. Many the considerable caution that had earlier
members indicated that the surprisingly marked business attitudes apparently

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, May 189
lingered. The pace of hiring seemed source of restraint on future household
to be picking up only gradually, fixed spending.
investment was still moderate in com­ Fiscal policy was viewed as likely to
parison with the strong cash flow being buoy the expansion of economic activity
generated by robust profits, and anec­ through 2004. Real federal expenditures
dotal information indicated that firms had jumped in the first quarter and were
in most industries were continuing to expected to rise further over the balance
exercise tight control over inventories. of the year. Next year, fiscal impetus
Indeed, several members remarked that was likely to diminish, largely owing to
the rate of inventory investment was the expiration of the tax provision per­
surprisingly modest in the first quarter, mitting partial expensing of certain capi­
although motor vehicle inventories were tal outlays. Assessing the prospects for
on the high side. On the whole, the fiscal policy, however, was complicated
evidence of continued caution and disci­ by a lack of legislative progress to date
plined spending in the business sector in passing federal appropriations bills.
was seen as boding well for the durabil­ Regarding the longer-term federal bud­
ity of the expansion. getary outlook, an apparent breakdown
Members viewed the household sec­ in fiscal discipline was seen as an ongo­
tor as continuing to play a key role in ing concern. However, some progress
the expansion, with recent data as well was noted in reducing budgetary imbal­
as anecdotal information indicating that ances at the state and local levels.
consumer spending was rising at a The external sector was expected to
solid pace. After dropping back in Jan­ provide limited support for U.S. eco­
uary, auto sales had accelerated over nomic growth over the next two years.
the remainder of the first quarter and Expansion of foreign economies was
appeared to be well maintained in April. likely to fuel increases in U.S. exports,
Expenditures for consumer services with strength expected particularly in
seemed to be expanding steadily. Sev­ computers and semiconductors. Real
eral members noted that tourism in imports, however, also appeared likely
their regions was picking up. In addi­ to continue rising strongly as domes­
tion, housing activity had stayed strong tic demand climbed further, leading to
across the nation and was still climbing a widening of already substantial trade
in some regions, with reports of growing and current account deficits. Some
backlogs in deliveries and substantial members saw a risk that growth in cer­
price increases in some markets. The tain rapidly expanding regions abroad
overall vigor in household spending was could slow, perhaps sharply, with poten­
being supported by substantial gains in tially significant effects on the demand
disposable income, partly reflecting tax for U.S. exports as well as on global
cuts, generally sound balance sheets, commodity prices.
accommodative financial conditions, After a protracted period of meager
and increases in consumer sentiment gains in employment, conditions in
over the past year or so. To date, the the U.S. labor market evidently were
backup in fixed mortgage interest rates improving in recent weeks. In addition
in recent months seemed to have had to noting the substantial jump in pay­
little adverse effect on homebuying, rolls in March, several members relayed
although it was noted that an appre­ anecdotal information from business
ciable further rise in longer-term mar­ contacts around the nation that hiring
ket rates would represent a potential was continuing to pick up and that firms

190 91st Annual Report, 2004
were planning further increases in work- pressures on unit labor costs, currently
forces. Some temporary help firms high price markups, and longer-term
reported rising demand, a possible pre­ inflation expectations that apparently
cursor of a pickup in permanent hiring. remained contained. Others, however,
A number of members cited reports of were less confident about the degree of
difficulties in hiring within certain job restraint on prices, noting that inflation
families in which specialized skills were predictions based on estimated output or
in short supply together with indications employment gaps were subject to con­
that wage increases in those occupations siderable error.
tended to be larger than average. Even In the Committee’s discussion of pol­
so, considerable slack seemed to remain icy for the intermeeting period, all of the
in the labor market overall, and wage members favored maintenance of the
gains on the whole were moderate. existing target of 1 percent for the fed­
Data on consumer and producer eral funds rate. It was recognized that
prices over the intermeeting period had the Committee would need to initiate
generally come in on the high side of a process of removing monetary policy
expectations, following considerable accommodation at some point, and the
increases in commodity prices. A sig­ recent experience suggested that the
nificant number of Committee members time at which policy firming appropri­
reported information from their contacts ately would commence might be closer
that businesses were increasingly able to than previously had seemed most prob­
pass on cost increases to their customers able. However, the appreciable rise in
and to boost prices more generally. real long-term interest rates over the
Some members cited instances in which intermeeting period implied that finan­
earlier price discounts had been can­ cial market conditions had already tight­
celed and noted that surcharges for ened on balance. Moreover, the evi­
higher energy and steel prices were dence of a significant acceleration in
being added to base prices for certain hiring was still limited, and some mem­
goods. Nonetheless, the extent to which bers referred to the possibility that
these developments signaled an upturn growth could falter, particularly if mar­
in underlying inflation was unclear. To ket yields were to rise sharply further.
some degree, the recent uptick in vari­ With inflation low and resource use
ous price measures partly reflected slack, the Committee saw a continuation
factors, such as jumps in the prices of of its existing policy stance as providing
energy and non-oil imports, that were a degree of support to the economic
unlikely to be repeated. Also, the recent expansion that was still appropriate.
evidence could be interpreted as indicat­ With regard to the Committee’s
ing that the surprisingly sharp decline in announcement to be released after the
measured inflation in 2003 exaggerated meeting, it was understood that the
the drop in the underlying rate of infla­ recent evidence that hiring had picked
tion. Indeed, some members saw under­ up, as well as the continued solid growth
lying inflation as relatively stable and in output, would be highlighted. Policy-
put low odds on the possibility that makers also concurred that, with the
prices now were accelerating. In their expansion apparently well established,
view, a range of factors was continuing the statement should again indicate that
to restrain inflation, including slack in the upside and downside risks to sustain­
resource utilization, strong productiv­ able growth for the next few quarters
ity gains and corresponding downward seemed to be roughly equal. Members

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, May 191
saw both downside and upside risks policy to a more neutral setting would
to prospects for inflation. The probable be more gradual, once under way, than
persistence of slack in the economy for in past episodes when inflation was
at least several more quarters, together well above levels consistent with price
with the likelihood that recent substan­ stability. In addition, some policymak­
tial gains in productivity would be ers observed that the timing and magni­
extended, should continue to exert slight tude of future policy adjustments would
downward pressures on inflation. At the ultimately be determined by the Com­
same time, though, the recent stronger- mittee’s interpretation of the incom­
than-expected increases in a number of ing data on the economy and prices
price measures, anecdotal information rather than by its current expectation
suggesting a greater ability of businesses of those developments. On balance, all
to implement and sustain price hikes, the members agreed that they could
and multiplying signs of solid economic accept an indication in the statement
growth suggested that the upside risks that ‘‘. . . policy accommodation can be
to inflation had increased. The members removed at a pace that is likely to be
agreed that, all things considered, the measured.’’
risks to the goal of price stability had At the conclusion of the discussion,
moved into balance in the period since the Committee voted to authorize and
the last meeting. direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
The Committee also discussed at York, until it was instructed otherwise,
length the advantages and disadvantages to execute transactions in the System
of modifying or dropping its statement Open Market Account in accordance
in the announcement following the with the following domestic policy
March meeting that ‘‘With inflation directive.
quite low and resource use slack, the
Committee believes that it can be The Federal Open Market Committee
patient in removing its policy accommo­ seeks monetary and financial conditions that
dation.’’ All of the members agreed that, will foster price stability and promote sus­
with policy tightening likely to begin tainable growth in output. To further its
long-run objectives, the Committee in the
sooner than previously expected, the ref­
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve
erence to patience was no longer war­ markets consistent with maintaining the
ranted. The Committee focused instead federal funds rate at an average of around
on a formulation that would emphasize 1 percent.
that policy tightening, once it began,
probably could proceed at a pace that The vote encompassed approval of
would be ‘‘measured.’’ A number of the paragraph below for inclusion in the
policymakers were concerned that such press statement to be released shortly
an assertion could unduly constrain after the meeting:
future adjustments to the stance of
policy should the evidence emerging in
The Committee perceives that the upside
coming months suggest that an appre­ and downside risks to the attainment of sus­
ciable firming would be appropriate. tainable growth for the next few quarters are
Others, however, saw substantial bene­ roughly equal. Similarly, the risks to the goal
of price stability have moved into balance.
fits to inclusion of the proposed lan­
At this juncture, with inflation quite low and
guage. These members noted that cur­
resource use slack, the Committee believes
rent economic circumstances made it that policy accommodation can be removed
likely that the process of returning at a pace that is likely to be measured.

192 91st Annual Report, 2004
Votes for this action: Messrs. Green- Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist
span, Geithner, Bernanke Ms. Bies, Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary
Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig, Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian- Mr. Mattingly, General Counsel
alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this Ms. Johnson, Economist
action: None. Mr. Stockton, Economist
It was agreed that the next meeting Messrs. Connors, Fuhrer, Hakkio,
of the Committee would be held on Howard, Madigan, Sniderman,
Slifman, Tracy, and Wilcox,
Tuesday–Wednesday, June 29–30, 2004.
Associate Economists
The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open
Vincent R. Reinhart Market Account
Secretary
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer,
Associate Directors, Division
Meeting Held on of Research and Statistics,
June 29–30, 2004 Board of Governors
A meeting of the Federal Open Market Messrs. Clouse and Whitesell, Deputy
Committee was held in the offices of Associate Directors, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of
the Board of Governors of the Federal
Governors
Reserve System in Washington, D.C.,
on Tuesday, June 29, 2004, at 2:30 p.m.
Mr. Kamin,5 Deputy Associate
and continued on Wednesday, June 30, Director, Division of International
2004, at 9:00 a.m. Finance, Board of Governors
Present: Messrs. Gagnon,5 Leahy,5 and Sheets,
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman Assistant Directors, Division
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman of International Finance,
Mr. Bernanke Board of Governors
Ms. Bies
Mr. Ferguson Mr. English, Assistant Director,
Mr. Gramlich Division of Monetary Affairs,
Mr. Hoenig Board of Governors
Mr. Kohn
Ms. Minehan Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division
Mr. Olson of Research and Statistics,
Ms. Pianalto Board of Governors
Mr. Poole
Mr. Thomas,5 Section Chief,
Ms. Cumming, Messrs. McTeer, Division of International Finance,
Moskow, Santomero, and Stern, Board of Governors
Alternate Members of the Federal
Open Market Committee Ms. Kusko 6 and Mr. Zakrajsˇek, Senior
Economists, Divisions of Research
Mr. Guynn and Ms. Yellen, Presidents and Statistics and Monetary
of the Federal Reserve Banks of Affairs respectively, Board of
Atlanta and San Francisco Governors
respectively
5. Attended portion of the meeting relating to
Mr. Lacker, President-Elect of the the discussion of prospective external adjustment.
Federal Reserve Bank of 6. Attended portion of the meeting relating to
Richmond the discussion of economic developments.

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, June 193
Mr. Carpenter,6 Economist, Division agencies during the period May 4,
of Monetary Affairs, Board of 2004, through June 29, 2004. By unani­
Governors
mous vote, the Committee ratified these
transactions.
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the
At this meeting, the Committee dis­
Board, Office of Board Members,
Board of Governors cussed staff papers and presentations on
adjustment of the U.S. external accounts.
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst, At more than $500 billion, the deficits
Division of Monetary Affairs, in trade and current account balances
Board of Governors
are quite large in comparison with
aggregate income. Financing of the defi­
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat
Assistant, Division of Monetary cits had recently included both large for­
Affairs, Board of Governors eign private purchases of U.S. securities
and increased foreign official inflows.
Mr. Lyon, First Vice President, Federal The sizable current account deficit could
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis
be viewed as reflecting very low levels
of national saving, in both its govern­
Mr. Judd, Executive Vice President,
ment and private components, in rela­
Federal Reserve Bank of
San Francisco tion to investment opportunities in the
United States that were very attractive.
Messrs. Eisenbeis, Evans, Goodfriend, The staff noted that outsized external
Mses. Mester and Perelmuter,5 deficits could not be sustained indefi­
Messrs. Rolnick and Rosenblum,
nitely. However, the historical evidence
Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
indicated that such deficits could be
Reserve Banks of Atlanta,
Chicago, Richmond, Philadelphia, quite persistent, and the adjustment of
New York, Minneapolis, and imbalances was not necessarily immi­
Dallas respectively nent. The adjustment, once under way,
might well proceed in a relatively
Ms. Goldberg5 and Mr. Thornton,
benign fashion, particularly if fiscal,
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
monetary, and trade policies were appro­
Banks of New York and St. Louis
respectively priate, but the possibility that the adjust­
ment could involve more wrenching
By unanimous vote, the minutes of changes could not be ruled out. In any
the meeting of the Federal Open Market case, a movement toward balance in the
Committee held on May 4, 2004, were trade and current accounts would likely
approved. have effects that differ appreciably
The Manager of the System Open across sectors of the U.S. economy.
Market Account reported on recent Members of the Committee noted that
developments in foreign exchange mar­ monetary policy was not well equipped
kets. There were no open market opera­ to promote the adjustment of external
tions in foreign currencies for the Sys­ imbalances but could best contribute by
tem’s account in the period since the maintaining an environment of price sta­
previous meeting. bility that would foster maximum sus­
The Manager also reported on devel­ tainable economic growth. Fiscal policy
opments in domestic financial markets had a potentially larger role to play by
and on System open market transactions promoting an increase in national sav­
in government securities and securities ing, but the adjustment would involve
issued or fully guaranteed by federal shifts in demand and output both domes­

194 91st Annual Report, 2004
tically and abroad, and changes to U.S. makers trimmed outsized inventory
fiscal policy alone probably would not positions. Capacity utilization moved
be sufficient to foster the adjustment. higher but stayed below its long-run
The information reviewed at this average.
meeting suggested that the economy Growth in real consumer spending
continued to expand at a solid pace dur­ appeared to have slowed somewhat in
ing the second quarter. Although growth recent months from its first-quarter
in consumer spending appeared to have pace. Although outlays for motor vehi­
slowed somewhat, the demand for cles in May more than retraced their
housing increased from its robust first- April decline and purchases of services
quarter pace. Business fixed investment, advanced at an appreciable rate, spend­
boosted by surging outlays on equip­ ing on nondurable goods remained slug­
ment and software, also grew rapidly. gish. Despite higher energy prices, real
The labor market improved further dur­ disposable personal income continued
ing the quarter, with large gains in its uptrend in recent months, benefiting
employment registered in April and from an improved labor market and last
May. Core consumer price inflation year’s tax cut. Home prices also contin­
picked up, reflecting in part the pass- ued to rise at a rapid pace, contributing
through of substantial advances in importantly to increases in household
energy prices and non-energy import wealth. Survey measures of consumer
prices. confidence moved up in June from
The labor market rebounded strongly already favorable levels.
in recent months. Private nonfarm pay­ Activity in the housing market
rolls grew rapidly in April and May, increased in April and May despite a
with hiring widespread across indus­ considerable rise in mortgage interest
tries. The manufacturing sector appeared rates. Single-family housing starts edged
to be on a more solid footing, as manu­ above their rapid first-quarter pace, and
facturers added jobs in each of the past sales of both new and existing homes
four months after more than three years reached record levels in May. In the
of declines. Aggregate hours moved up volatile multifamily sector, housing
in both April and May, bringing the starts fell somewhat in May, but, more
level of hours substantially above its generally, construction activity in this
trough of last summer. Despite the sector had been surprisingly resilient in
recent strength in hiring, the unemploy­ light of the high vacancy rate for such
ment rate changed little in recent units.
months, and the labor force participation Business investment spending ap­
rate remained low. peared to have advanced at a brisk pace
Industrial production accelerated in in the second quarter, as rising output,
April and May after a sizable advance low user cost of capital, and increased
in the first quarter. Output at utilities corporate cash flow continued to foster
surged in the latter month, reflecting a favorable environment for capital
weather-related factors, and factory out­ spending. Although new orders and
put excluding motor vehicles, buoyed shipments of nondefense capital goods
by strong gains in both high-tech manu­ excluding aircraft dipped in May, both
facturing industries and in most non- series remained on a solid uptrend,
high-tech industries, expanded sharply and, with orders exceeding shipments,
in both months. In contrast, the produc­ backlogs continued to grow. Spending
tion of motor vehicles declined as auto- on transportation equipment, which

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, June 195
dropped in the first quarter, appeared to foreign industrial countries expanded at
rebound in recent months, while outside a healthy pace in the first quarter. Indi­
the transportation and high-tech sectors, cators of economic activity in the sec­
increases in spending moderated from ond quarter for Canada and the United
their rapid first-quarter pace. After Kingdom were also favorable, whereas
declining in the first quarter, overall those for the euro area were somewhat
investment in nonresidential structures mixed. Japan’s economy, supported by
appeared to pick up a little in the second robust private domestic demand and ris­
quarter, though the performance of the ing consumer confidence, evidently con­
major types of construction remained tinued to expand strongly in the second
mixed. Spending on office buildings and quarter. Mainly as a result of higher
manufacturing structures continued to energy prices, consumer price inflation
be depressed by high vacancy rates, moved up a bit in the second quarter
while outlays for commercial buildings in Canada, the United Kingdom, and the
moved up in conjunction with declines euro area, while slight deflation per­
in vacancy rates for such structures. In sisted in Japan.
addition, judging by the number of natu­ Consumer price inflation turned up
ral gas drilling rigs in operation, spend­ this year from the very low rates regis­
ing on drilling and mining structures tered in 2003, both for overall measures
rose in recent months. and for those that exclude food and
The pace of inventory accumulation energy. Overall consumer prices rose
remained subdued. Although the book more quickly than core prices, reflecting
value of manufacturing and trade inven­ the direct contributions of substantial
tories increased appreciably in the first increases in prices of food and energy.
quarter and continued to rise at about But the step-up in core inflation was
the same pace in April, the recent large also due in part to the pass-through of
increases in the book-value data were higher energy and import costs into core
due importantly to a jump in the price of consumer prices. Some survey measures
oil and a run-up in the prices of interme­ of short-term inflation expectations
diate materials. Inventory–sales ratios in moved higher in recent months, but
manufacturing and retail trade edged longer-term expectations remained rea­
higher in April but remained near their sonably well contained. Commodity
historical lows; meanwhile, inventory– prices escalated sharply during the early
sales ratios in the wholesale trade sector months of 2004, but indexes of spot
trended lower. prices for industrial materials and for
The U.S. international trade deficit wholesale gasoline retreated appreciably
reached a new record in April, reflecting in recent weeks. Meanwhile, labor costs
in large part a sharp decline in exports appeared to have turned up in the first
of goods. The fall in goods exports was half of the year. Hourly compensation in
widespread, with notable decreases in private industry rose in the first quarter
capital goods, industrial supplies, and at the same rate as in 2003, but with the
agricultural products. Exports of ser­ pace of productivity advance moderat­
vices, in contrast, increased in April. ing, unit labor costs moved higher. In
Imports of goods edged higher, as a April and May, increases in average
large decline in the value of imported oil hourly earnings of production or non-
was offset by an increase in imports supervisory workers on private nonfarm
of non-oil products, and imports of ser­ payrolls exceeded the monthly gains
vices increased. Real GDP in the major registered in the first quarter and were

196 91st Annual Report, 2004
well above the increases in the fourth on nominal Treasury securities, which
quarter of 2003. increased commensurately. Yields on
At its meeting on May 4, 2004, the inflation-indexed Treasury securities
Federal Open Market Committee rose almost as much as those on their
decided to leave its target for the federal nominal counterparts, leaving inflation
funds rate unchanged at 1 percent. The compensation only slightly higher, on
Committee retained its assessment that net, by the end of the intermeeting
the upside and downside risks to the period. Yields on investment- and
attainment of sustainable growth were speculative-grade corporate securities
roughly equal, but it announced that the rose about the same amount as those
risks to the goal of price stability had on comparable Treasuries, leaving risk
moved into balance. The Committee spreads about unchanged. Generally
also noted that output had continued positive economic news and further
to expand at a solid pace, new hiring improvements in the outlook for corpo­
had appeared to pick up, and although rate earnings evidently offset the influ­
incoming data on inflation showed ence of higher interest rates, and major
that it had moved somewhat higher, equity indexes edged higher over the
longer-term inflation expectations had intermeeting period. In foreign exchange
remained well contained. Reflecting markets, the dollar depreciated some­
these developments, the Committee what against major currencies, and it
concluded that it could remove policy rose a bit against an index of currencies
accommodation at a pace that was likely of other major U.S. trading partners.
to be measured. M2 continued to expand rapidly in
The Committee’s decision at its May May. The upswing in M2 growth since
meeting to leave the intended level of late winter stemmed in part from the
the federal funds rate unchanged had temporary effects of mortgage refinanc­
been fully anticipated by market partici­ ing, which boosted liquid deposits over
pants. Likewise, the replacement of the this period, though M2 was also buoyed
sentence in the announcement reporting by strong gains in nominal income. In
that the Committee could be patient recent months, a rebound in currency
in removing policy accommodation with growth and reduced portfolio shifts by
one indicating that policy accommoda­ households from monetary assets to
tion can be removed at a pace that is equities and bonds also supported the
likely to be measured had little net effect expansion of M2. The growth of M2
on money market futures rates on the slowed appreciably during the first half
day of the announcement. Over the bal­ of June. Commercial bank credit decel­
ance of the intermeeting period, how­ erated in May, reflecting a contraction in
ever, market participants marked up sig­ bank holdings of securities and a slow­
nificantly the extent of expected policy down in the growth of loans. The slow­
tightening in response to data that indi­ ing in loan growth was concentrated
cated robust gains in employment and mainly in real estate credits and was due
spending and somewhat elevated infla­ partly to heavy securitizations.
tion, as well as to comments by Com­ The staff forecast prepared for this
mittee members providing reassurance meeting suggested that the economy
that policy would be tightened as neces­ would continue to expand at a solid
sary to contain any incipient inflationary pace through 2005. Monetary policy
pressures. Revisions to policy expecta­ was expected to support economic activ­
tions showed through to interest rates ity over the projection period, and fiscal

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, June 197
policy was anticipated to remain accom­ with notable improvement in labor mar­
modative through 2004. Moreover, per­ ket conditions and in manufacturing
sisting strong gains in structural produc­ activity. Members saw the persistence
tivity would likely continue to provide of a relatively vigorous expansion in
significant impetus to spending. With overall economic activity as a likely
firms shedding their unusual caution prospect in the context of continuing
of the past few years, further large stimulus from fiscal and monetary
additions to payrolls over the next policies, accommodative financial con­
several quarters were anticipated, fol­ ditions, growing business optimism,
lowed by a gradual moderation in the favorable consumer sentiment, and
rate of increase in employment. Strong robust increases in productivity. Solid
profits, sustained increases in aggregate increases in economic activity and
demand, and a favorable financing envi­ employment should in turn provide
ronment were expected to keep business ongoing support to business and con­
spending on equipment and software sumer spending. Members acknowl­
on a healthy upward trajectory over the edged that their favorable outlook for
forecast period. The impending expira­ economic activity was based on the
tion of the partial-expensing tax provi­ assumption that major terrorist disrup­
sion was likely to provide an additional tions would be averted.
boost to capital spending later this year, In light of the strength of economic
although the shifting forward of some activity and recent indications of some­
investment was expected to dampen what increased price pressures, the
capital spending in early 2005. In addi­ members focused particular attention on
tion, inventory investment was forecast the outlook for inflation. They referred
to increase gradually in order to bring to statistical and anecdotal evidence that
changes in stocks closer in line with on the whole pointed to some recent
rising sales. Robust employment growth acceleration of consumer prices and to
and the cumulative productivity gains of some increase in near-term inflation
recent years were expected to contribute expectations. Factors cited in this regard
to strong advances in real disposable included large increases in prices of
income, sustaining the expansion of energy and intermediate materials, both
consumption spending over the forecast of which appeared to be passing through
period. Core inflation was projected to at least in part to core consumer prices.
fall back later this year from its pace Members referred to some limited infla­
in the first five months and to remain tionary impetus as well from the depre­
low in 2005, as the transitory effects of ciation of the dollar and larger increases
higher energy and non-oil import prices in labor compensation. Considerable
waned. uncertainty still surrounded the overall
In the Committee’s discussion of cur­ extent to which competitive pressures
rent and prospective economic condi­ would allow producers to pass through
tions, members commented that the rising costs to prices of finished goods;
evidence accumulated over the inter- anecdotal reports suggested that the
meeting period continued to portray an ability of many producers to do so was
economy that was expanding briskly and increasing but was far from universal
was likely to continue to do so for some at this point. With regard to the pro­
time. Business and consumer expendi­ spective course of inflation, members
tures were on a strong uptrend, and suggested that some of the rise in core
related growth in output was associated inflation in recent months appeared to

198 91st Annual Report, 2004
have resulted from what might well for 2005 the forecasts were in a reduced
prove to be transitory factors, notably range of 31⁄
2
to 4 percent. These rates of
including increases in energy and other growth were associated with ranges for
import prices, which were not seen as the civilian rate of unemployment of
likely to persist and indeed might be 51⁄
4
to 51⁄
2
percent in the fourth quarter
partially reversed. Just how much slow­ of 2004 and 5 to 51⁄
2
percent in the
ing of price increases was likely after fourth quarter of 2005. Forecasts of the
some relatively elevated readings was rate of inflation, as measured by the
difficult to forecast. Those who antici­ core PCE price index, pointed to mar­
pated a noticeable deceleration empha­ ginally higher rates of inflation encom­
sized the contribution of the one-time passed by ranges of 11⁄
2
to 2 percent for
price increases that had boosted infla­ this year and 11⁄
2
to 21⁄
2
percent for
tion recently, persisting, albeit diminish­ 2005.
ing, margins of unemployed labor and In their comments about develop­
other productive resources, the anticipa­ ments in key sectors of the economy,
tion of strong further gains in productiv­ many of the members emphasized the
ity and declines in markups of goods strength in business capital spending.
prices over costs, and steady long-term Explanatory factors included the sus­
inflation expectations. Others tended to tained demand for business output,
emphasize the changes in business atti­ strong profit margins and cash flow, low
tudes and expectations, the strength in capital costs, and the partial-expensing
labor compensation, and the tendency tax provision. Weakness persisted, how­
for underlying inflation trends to be sub­ ever, in the nonresidential construction
ject to considerable momentum that was sector, though signs of improvement
unlikely to be reversed quickly. What­ were emerging in some areas. Many
ever their inflation forecasts, several business contacts were expressing a
noted that they now had less confidence marked degree of optimism about the
in those forecasts than earlier. A number outlook for business activity in the sec­
of members qualified their inflation out­ ond half of the year. Currently low
look by noting that its realization likely inventory-to-sales ratios, indeed reports
would require an adjustment to mone­ of emerging bottlenecks in some mar­
tary policy over time that brought the kets, were expected to foster efforts to
latter to a neutral stance as the economy rebuild inventories and thus add support
continued to move toward full utiliza­ to the expansion going forward.
tion of its resources. Consumer outlays were rising more
In preparation for the midyear mone­ moderately in the second quarter and
tary policy report to Congress, the mem­ somewhat below expectations. The
bers of the Board of Governors and the slowing was not universal, however.
presidents of the Federal Reserve Banks Some members reported a continuation
submitted individual projections of the of robust consumer expenditures in vari­
growth of GDP, the rate of unemploy­ ous parts of the country. Looking ahead,
ment, and the rate of inflation for the members, in part echoing the sentiment
years 2004 and 2005. The forecasts of of contacts among retailers, anticipated
the rate of expansion in real GDP were renewed strength in consumer spending
concentrated in the upper part of a 4 to in the context of sizable further growth
43⁄
4
percent range for 2004, implying in employment and disposable incomes
expectations by most members of a and a generally high level of consumer
pickup over the second half of the year; confidence. In housing markets, activity

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, June 199
had remained at generally high levels, for the federal funds rate from a level of
with only a few signs that rising mort­ 1 percent to 11⁄
4
percent. Recent devel­
gage rates were beginning to hold down opments, notably the persistence of solid
sales and construction. There was evi­ gains in output and employment along
dence in some areas that inventories with indications of some increase in
of unsold homes had risen. Members inflation, were seen as warranting a first
noted that persisting overall strength step in the process of removing policy
in housing might to some extent be accommodation. The timing and pace of
a response to expectations of further further policy moves would depend, of
increases in mortgage rates, implying course, on the members’ reading of the
that a slowdown might be likely later in incoming economic information and
the year. their interpretation of its implications
Members commented that fiscal pol­ for economic activity and inflation. In
icy was continuing to provide appre­ this regard, members commented that
ciable impetus to the economy, in part they could envision a series of gradual
because of the incentives for business or ‘‘measured’’ policy moves as likely
investment associated with the partial- to be consistent with the attainment of
expensing tax legislation. Following the the Committee’s objectives for sustain­
scheduled expiration of that legislation ing progress toward higher levels of
at the end of this year and with more resource utilization and maintaining
moderate gains in federal spending fore­ price stability. A few indicated, how­
cast in the absence of new legislation, ever, that their preference would be to
the federal budget was expected to remove any characterization of possible
become mildly contractionary in 2005, future policy actions from the Commit­
although a marked degree of uncertainty tee’s statements. Partly reflecting antici­
surrounded this outlook. Many state and pated monetary policy actions, finan­
local governments were increasing their cial market conditions had tightened in
spending more rapidly in response to recent months, but short-term interest
brightening budget situations. rates were quite low, especially when
Expanding foreign economies and the judged against the recent level of infla­
depreciation of the dollar were expected tion. Depending on the rate at which
to foster appreciable growth in U.S. resource utilization increased and the
exports, but with imports still consider­ level and trend of inflation, a more
ably larger than exports, the external aggressive pace toward reaching a neu­
sector was likely to make a measurable tral policy stance might be called for
negative contribution to U.S. GDP so as to provide assurance of containing
growth this year and next. On the emerging inflationary pressures and
inflation side, higher import prices averting the potential need for greater
and, importantly, the rise in domestic overall tightening over time.
and imported oil prices were adding In the Committee’s review of the
to domestic inflationary pressures, announcement to be released shortly
although improving oil supplies had after this meeting, members agreed that
recently contributed to somewhat lower an updating of the reasons for its policy
domestic gasoline prices. decision was desirable, specifically by
In the Committee’s discussion of pol­ adding a reference to the possibility that
icy for the intermeeting period, all of the some of the recent acceleration in infla­
members indicated that they could sup­ tion might reflect transitory factors. The
port an upward adjustment in the target members also decided to modify the

200 91st Annual Report, 2004
reference to labor market conditions by The Committee perceives the upside and
referring in general terms to improved downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability for the
conditions rather than more narrowly to
next few quarters are roughly equal. With
a pickup in hiring to acknowledge the
underlying inflation still expected to be rela­
broad range of labor market indicators tively low, the Committee believes that pol­
considered by the Committee. They icy accommodation can be removed at a
agreed to retain the assessments adopted pace that is likely to be measured. Nonethe­
at the May meeting indicating that they less, the Committee will respond to changes
in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its
viewed the upside and downside risks to
obligation to maintain price stability.
both the attainment of sustainable eco­
nomic growth and to the goal of price
Votes for this action: Messrs. Green-
stability as roughly in balance for the
span, Geithner, Bernanke, Ms. Bies,
next few quarters. However, with regard Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig,
to the outlook for inflation, a number of Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian-
members emphasized that they would alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this
action: None.
view the risks as tilted to the upside in
the absence of further policy tightening
actions that would bring the stance of The next meeting of the Committee
policy to a more neutral setting. Many was scheduled to be held on Tuesday,
members also underscored their view August 10, 2004.
that the statement should make clear The meeting adjourned at 1:35 p.m.
that the Committee would be prepared
to respond to significant changes in Vincent R. Reinhart
economic prospects and take actions that Secretary
were deemed necessary to meet the
Committee’s commitment to maintain
price stability.
At the conclusion of the discussion, Meeting Held on
the Committee voted to authorize and August 10, 2004
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
A meeting of the Federal Open Market
York, until it was instructed otherwise,
Committee was held in the offices of
to execute transactions in the System
the Board of Governors of the Federal
Account in accordance with the follow­
Reserve System in Washington, D.C.,
ing domestic policy directive.
on Tuesday, August 10, 2004, at
9:00 a.m.
The Federal Open Market Committee
seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sus­ Present:
tainable growth in output. To further its Mr. Greenspan, Chairman
long-run objectives, the Committee in the Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve Mr. Bernanke
markets consistent with increasing the fed­ Ms. Bies
eral funds rate to an average of around Mr. Ferguson
11⁄4 percent. Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn
The vote encompassed approval of
Ms. Minehan
the paragraph below for inclusion in the
Mr. Olson
press statement to be released shortly Ms. Pianalto
after the meeting: Mr. Poole

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, August 201
Messrs. McTeer, Moskow, Santomero, Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat
and Stern, Alternate Members Assistant, Division of Monetary
of the Federal Open Market Affairs, Board of Governors
Committee
Messrs. Goodfriend and Rudesbusch
Messrs. Guynn, Lacker, and and Ms. Mester, Senior Vice
Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, of Richmond, San Francisco, and
Richmond, and San Francisco Philadelphia respectively
respectively
Messrs. Cunningham, Hilton, Marshall,
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist Tootell, and Wynne, Vice
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary of Atlanta, New York, Chicago,
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel Boston, and Dallas respectively
Ms. Johnson, Economist
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer,
Federal Reserve Bank of
Messrs. Connors, Hakkio, Howard,
Minneapolis
Madigan, Rasche, Sniderman,
Slifman, Tracy, and Wilcox,
By unanimous vote, the minutes of
Associate Economists
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open Committee held on June 29–30, 2004,
Market Account were approved.
By unanimous vote, the Federal Open
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Market Committee approved the elec­
Associate Directors, Division tion of Scott G. Alvarez as General
of Research and Statistics,
Counsel of the Committee to serve
Board of Governors
until the election of a successor at the
first regularly scheduled meeting after
Mr. Whitesell, Deputy Associate
Director, Division of Monetary December 31, 2004.
Affairs, Board of Governors The Manager of the System Open
Market Account reported on recent
Mr. English, Assistant Director, developments in foreign exchange mar­
Division of Monetary Affairs, kets. There were no open market opera­
Board of Governors
tions in foreign currencies for the Sys­
tem’s account in the period since the
Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division
previous meeting.
of Research and Statistics,
The Manager also reported on recent
Board of Governors
developments in domestic financial mar­
Mr. Nelson, Section Chief, Division kets and on System open market trans­
of Monetary Affairs, Board actions in government securities and
of Governors securities issued or fully guaranteed
by federal agencies during the period
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division June 29, 2004, through August 9, 2004.
of Monetary Affairs, Board
By unanimous vote, the Committee rati­
of Governors
fied these transactions.
The information reviewed at this
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst,
Division of Monetary Affairs, meeting suggested that economic
Board of Governors growth softened somewhat in recent

202 91st Annual Report, 2004
months. While strength in the housing the first quarter. However, data on the
market persisted and business outlays growth in production-worker hours and
remained healthy, growth in consumer other indicators of production suggested
spending fell off significantly. Addition­ that manufacturing output bounced back
ally, gains in employment, which were in July.
robust in earlier months, slowed sharply Growth in consumer spending slowed
in June and July. Industrial production sharply in the second quarter, posting
also decelerated modestly in June, but only a small increase after a robust
available indicators suggested a bounce­ expansion in the first quarter. Although
back in July. Core consumer price infla­ gains in outlays for services continued
tion moderated in May and June, despite at a solid rate in the second quarter,
further increases in energy prices. expenditures for goods declined mark­
Growth in employment slowed in edly. Data on consumer expenditures
June and July after displaying signifi­ showed particular weakness in June,
cant improvement in preceding months. with either declines or no growth in
The weakness was reported to be wide­ purchases across most categories of
spread, with the retail trade, informa­ goods and services. Purchases of cars
tion, financial activities, and govern­ and trucks contracted in that month but
ment sectors registering declines on rebounded in July. Real disposable
average over the two months. The con­ income was unchanged in June, held
struction and services sectors posted back by increases in prices of food and,
gains, but at a pace well below those of especially, energy.
previous months. In contrast, after little Activity in the housing market
change in June, payrolls in manufactur­ remained strong in June despite some
ing rose appreciably in July. The aver­ variation across segments. Single-family
age workweek declined in June but housing starts fell back from very high
edged up in July, and aggregate hours levels in April and May. Multifamily
of private production workers showed housing starts also declined in June,
a similar pattern. Labor force participa­ though only a bit. Sales of existing
tion moved up slightly in recent months, homes jumped again in June to set a
and the unemployment rate, which was new record, and sales of new homes
unchanged in June, edged down to came in just below the record pace
51⁄
2
percent in July. posted in May.
After rising rapidly in April and May, Business investment spending on
industrial production declined modestly equipment and software was solid in the
in June, although manufacturing output, second quarter, posting growth a little
excluding motor vehicles and parts, above the pace of the first quarter. Per­
increased a bit. Production of motor formance across categories, however,
vehicles and parts declined noticeably, was uneven. Spending in the transpor­
as automakers scaled back assemblies in tation equipment sector bounced back
response to elevated inventories. Output from a first-quarter decline, and outlays
at utilities also fell in June as tempera­ in the high-tech sector grew twice as
tures returned to more normal levels fast as overall equipment and software
after an unseasonably warm May. Activ­ spending in the quarter. Excluding trans­
ity in the mining sector changed little. portation and high-tech equipment,
Overall capacity utilization was off however, gains were minimal. Real
slightly in June, but utilization on aver­ business investment in nonresidential
age over the quarter was above that of structures turned up in the second

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, August 203
quarter, albeit to a still-depressed level. July, households’ expectations for con­
Increased spending on office buildings, sumer inflation in the year ahead fell
commercial structures, and various other somewhat. Overall producer prices for
types of buildings more than offset a finished goods were down in June, as
sizable decline in the power generation declines in prices for food and energy
component. were only partially offset by modest
Real nonfarm inventories excluding growth in the core components of the
motor vehicles picked up in the sec­ index. With regard to labor costs, the
ond quarter as the manufacturing, mer­ employment cost index for hourly com­
chant wholesalers, and retail trade seg­ pensation of private workers for the
ments all boosted stocks. Book-value three months ending in June advanced at
inventory–sales ratios edged up, but about the same rate as it had over the
remained at fairly low levels. previous year-and-a-half. Unit labor
The U.S. international trade deficit costs, however, increased faster in the
declined somewhat in May after reach­ second quarter than in the first.
ing a record high in April. The value of At its meeting on June 29–30, 2004,
exports of goods and services climbed the Federal Open Market Committee
substantially, with exports of goods adopted a directive that called for condi­
more than accounting for the entire rise, tions in reserve markets consistent with
as exports of services edged down. The increasing the federal funds rate to an
value of imports of goods and services average of around 11⁄
4
percent. The
also increased in the month, but by less Committee continued to perceive that
than exports. Available data indicated the upside and downside risks to the
that major foreign industrial economies attainment of both sustainable growth
continued to expand at a solid pace in and price stability for the next few quar­
recent months. In Japan, gains in exports ters were roughly equal. In its public
and household expenditures fueled the statement, the Committee noted that,
advance in output, and surveys of busi­ with underlying inflation still expected
ness and consumer confidence were also to be relatively low, it believed that pol­
favorable. Real GDP accelerated in the icy accommodation could be removed at
United Kingdom, and economic activity a pace that was likely to be measured,
grew at a solid pace in Canada, led by a but that, nonetheless, it would respond
surge in investment. Indicators for the to changes in economic prospects as
euro area suggested that activity deceler­ needed to fulfill its obligation to main­
ated a bit in the second quarter. Growth tain price stability.
of real GDP in China slowed signifi­ This decision to raise the intended
cantly in the spring. level of the federal funds rate by 25
Core consumer price inflation mod­ basis points was anticipated in the finan­
erated substantially in May and June, cial markets, yet investors revised down
though sizable increases in food and their expectations for the path of policy
energy prices continued to push up over­ upon the release of the accompanying
all consumer price inflation. Increases in statement. In particular, investors noted
the food and energy components of the that the Committee attributed some of
CPI were smaller in June than in May, the recent increase in inflation to transi­
and further deceleration was expected as tory factors, retained its earlier balance
gasoline and natural gas prices eased in of risks assessment, and reiterated its
July and supply conditions in a number belief that policy accommodation could
of agricultural segments improved. In be removed at a pace that would likely

204 91st Annual Report, 2004
be measured. Subsequently, the Chair­ would continue to expand at a solid pace
man’s Congressional testimony on through 2005, supported by a relatively
monetary policy, which suggested that accommodative monetary policy over
recent softness in consumer spending the projection period and by stimulative
should prove short-lived and empha­ fiscal policy through 2004. Consumer
sized the FOMC’s commitment to price spending was expected to strengthen in
stability, spurred an upward tilt in the the near term, boosted by strong con­
market’s expected path of monetary sumer confidence and rising disposable
policy. Over the remainder of the inter- income, which would likely continue
meeting period, though, expectations of to be propelled by robust growth in
policy tightening were revised down structural productivity. Favorable finan­
somewhat, on balance, as incoming cial conditions, higher profits, and the
data pointed to weaker-than-anticipated partial-expensing tax incentives over the
spending and employment and more remainder of this year were projected to
subdued core inflation. Yields on lead to a near-term acceleration in busi­
intermediate- and long-term nominal ness fixed investment. Subsequently,
Treasury securities dropped signifi­ growth in capital spending was expected
cantly over the intermeeting period. to moderate somewhat but still to remain
Available data suggested that corpo­ on a healthy upward trajectory. Despite
rate credit quality remained strong, recent weakness in employment growth,
and yields on investment-grade bonds the waning of firms’ unusual caution of
moved roughly in line with those on recent years was expected to foster a
Treasury securities. Speculative-grade pickup in hiring over the next several
yields, however, fell by less. In equity quarters. Consumer price inflation was
markets, broad indexes declined appre­ projected to remain low over the fore­
ciably, reflecting the soft economic cast period as the sharp increases in
data, concerns about energy prices, and energy and import prices experienced
guidance from corporations pointing to earlier in the year partially unwound.
a less-optimistic trajectory for earnings Slack resource utilization through 2005
than investors apparently had been was also expected to help hold down
expecting. In foreign exchange markets, inflation.
the dollar’s trade-weighted value against In the Committee’s discussion of cur­
other major currencies ended the period rent and prospective economic devel­
little changed, on net. opments, members noted that the pace
Following several months of robust of the expansion had moderated. In par­
expansion, M2 grew at a slower pace in ticular, consumer spending, which had
June and available data implied a slight previously provided considerable sup­
contraction in July. Most of the weak­ port to aggregate demand, had slowed
ness owed to a slowdown in liquid sharply in the second quarter. At the
deposit growth that was related in part same time, growth in payrolls had fallen
to the decline in mortgage refinancing back in June and July after posting sig­
activity. In addition, retail money mar­ nificant gains in the spring. While the
ket funds resumed their earlier decline. recent moderation in growth might por­
Currency growth, however, strengthened tend a substantially slower expansion
over the two months, partly as a result going forward than had previously been
of a pickup in foreign demand. expected, the Committee did not see
The staff forecast prepared for this such a sizable shortfall as the most likely
meeting suggested that the economy outcome. Activity in the housing sector

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, August 205
remained strong, and investment out­ dent on imported oil appeared to have
lays continued to advance at a good been fairly modest thus far. Informed in
pace. With economic growth buoyed by part by prices in futures markets, Com­
accommodative monetary policy and mittee members anticipated that energy
supportive credit conditions more gen­ costs would level out and perhaps fall
erally as well as by robust underlying back from their recent highs, but they
growth in productivity, the Committee noted that there was considerable uncer­
believed that conditions were in place tainty about that outlook.
for the pace of expansion to strengthen Policymakers focused their comments
enough to continue to trim margins of about key sectors of the economy on the
slack in resource utilization. Indeed, the slowdown in consumer spending toward
limited available evidence pointed to a the end of the second quarter. Business
rebound in household spending, espe­ contacts in some parts of the country
cially on motor vehicles, in July and suggested that, in addition to higher
early August, and some indicators sug­ energy prices, unseasonable weather
gested continued improvement in labor may have limited spending for a time.
market conditions. Regarding the out­ The Committee discussed a number of
look for inflation, the most recent data other factors that may have contributed
were seen as consistent with an assess­ to the slowdown, including a waning of
ment that a portion of the higher rates of the stimulus from last year’s tax cuts,
price increases recorded earlier in the which had previously provided consid­
year had reflected transitory factors. erable impetus to spending, and the pos­
Committee members generally agreed sibility that, with stock prices down,
that higher energy prices had played an saving rates near historic lows, and the
important role in the recent moderation outlook more uncertain, households may
of economic growth. While the direct have felt the need to boost saving.
effect of higher energy prices on real Although a complete accounting for the
disposable income could account for moderation in growth was not possible,
only a relatively small part of the reduc­ the Committee agreed that a resumption
tion in the growth of consumer spend­ of faster growth in consumer spending
ing, some members suggested that those was very likely. Continued strength in
effects may have been exacerbated by home construction did not suggest that
substantial increases in expected future households were in the process of
energy costs as well as greater uncer­ retrenching, and gains in income, low
tainty about those costs. Moreover, the interest rates, and robust consumer con­
economy seemed to have responded in fidence were seen as undergirding fur­
some past episodes to sharp increases in ther gains in household spending going
energy costs by much more than could forward. Members noted that reports
be explained by most models. Still, of rising motor vehicle sales in July
some Committee members doubted that and early August and a firming of chain
higher energy prices were sufficient to store sales in recent weeks provided
explain all of the recent slowdown in some limited evidence that consumption
spending. Effects of increased energy spending was picking up.
prices on consumer and business confi­ Investment spending had continued to
dence, which might have led to a larger advance, though perhaps at a somewhat
spending response, had not been evi­ slower pace than some members had
dent, and the consequences for growth anticipated. Several policymakers noted
in other industrialized countries depen­ that businesses remained cautious about

206 91st Annual Report, 2004
capital spending and hiring and were pointed to data from the survey of
attempting to boost production as much households, which showed both a rise in
as possible with existing capacity and labor force participation and a decline
payrolls. Indeed, some members sug­ in the unemployment rate in July, as
gested that heightened uncertainty, well as to initial claims for unemploy­
reflecting the effects of higher energy ment compensation, which remained
prices and increased concerns about near recent lows. Moreover, survey data
geopolitical risks, might have contrib­ on labor market attitudes of both con­
uted to greater business caution of late. sumers and businesses had not signaled
Nonetheless, business confidence gen­ a significant deterioration in employ­
erally remained high, and the funda­ ment prospects. All things considered,
mentals for investment—including solid the Committee expected the pace of
growth in productivity, robust profits employment gains to improve in coming
and cash flow, and accommodative months.
financial markets—pointed to continued In their review of the outlook for
healthy gains in business outlays. A few prices, members noted that incoming
members also noted that the commercial data over the intermeeting period had
real estate sector, which had been weak shown a slowing in core inflation from
for some time, was showing signs of the high levels posted earlier in the year,
improvement. consistent with the Committee’s view
In their remarks regarding the exter­ that a portion of the earlier increase
nal sector of the economy, members had reflected transitory factors. Informa­
noted that on average growth abroad tion from business contacts suggested
had remained reasonably robust, which that a number of firms had been able to
should support U.S. exports. However, pass on at least some of their higher
the U.S. trade deficit was expected to energy and other costs to customers, but
remain large as imports increased in few signs of more widespread price
response to solid growth in the United increases were apparent. Some members
States. expressed concern about developments
In their discussion of recent labor in the transportation sector, where truck­
market trends, Committee members ing costs were reportedly on the rise
noted the slowing of job growth reported and bottlenecks in the railroad industry
in June and July. Committee members were triggering delivery delays. Look­
pointed to several factors that that might ing forward, however, most members
have contributed to the recent weak­ thought that rapid productivity growth
ness. Firms’ focus on controlling costs and flat or declining energy prices
and implementing further productivity would limit increases in the overall
improvements were doubtless continu­ unit costs of businesses. Despite the
ing to play a role. Higher labor costs, higher rates of headline inflation earlier
particularly those related to health bene­ in the year, longer-term inflation expec­
fits, were also reportedly weighing on tations remained well contained and
some firms’ hiring decisions. However, slack in resource markets was seen as
policymakers noted that the monthly persisting, leading the Committee to
payrolls data might be providing an expect underlying inflation to be rela­
incomplete picture of expansion in tively low.
economic activity because of near-term In the Committee’s discussion of pol­
variation in the rate of growth of pro­ icy for the intermeeting period, all the
ductivity. In addition, many members members favored an increase in the tar­

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, August 207
get for the federal funds rate from 11⁄
4
to stability were balanced over the next
11⁄
2
percent. Although the pace of eco­ few quarters. While a more persistent
nomic growth had moderated in the sec­ slowing of household spending was
ond quarter, the Committee believed that possible, and more subdued inflation
the softness would prove short-lived and readings over the intermeeting period
that the economy was poised to resume had eased concerns about a potential
a stronger rate of expansion going for­ increase in underlying inflation, policy-
ward. Given the current quite low level makers continued to judge the risks to
of short-term rates, especially when sustainable growth and the inflation out­
judged against the recent level of infla­ look as roughly balanced. The Commit­
tion, members noted that significant tee chose to reiterate its belief that pol­
cumulative policy tightening likely icy accommodation could be removed
would be needed to foster conditions at a pace that is likely to be measured
consistent with the Committee’s objec­ as well as its intention to respond
tives for price stability and sustainable to changes in economic prospects as
economic growth. In this context, a needed to fulfill its obligation to achieve
relatively small tightening move at this its goal of price stability.
meeting would help to limit the risk of a At the conclusion of the discussion,
rise in inflation expectations and reduce the Committee voted to authorize and
the likelihood that policy might need to direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
be adjusted more sharply in the future, York, until it was instructed otherwise,
thereby lowering the attendant risks to to execute transactions in the System
financial markets and the economy. The Account in accordance with the follow­
members thought that policy accom­ ing domestic policy directive.
modation probably could be removed
gradually—a view that had been rein­ The Federal Open Market Committee
forced by the slower pace of growth and seeks monetary and financial conditions that
will foster price stability and promote sus­
more moderate rates of price increase
tainable growth in output. To further its
that had become evident over the inter-
long-run objectives, the Committee in the
meeting period. However, members also immediate future seeks conditions in reserve
recognized that the timing and pace markets consistent with increasing the
of additional policy tightening would federal funds rate to an average of around
depend importantly on incoming eco­
11⁄2 percent.
nomic data and the Committee’s assess­
The vote encompassed approval of
ment of their implications for economic
the paragraph below for inclusion in the
activity and inflation.
press statement to be released shortly
With regard to the Committee’s
after the meeting:
announcement to be released after the
meeting, members agreed that the
The Committee perceives the upside
description of recent economic circum­
and downside risks to the attainment of both
stances should acknowledge the slow­
sustainable growth and price stability for the
ing in output and employment growth, next few quarters are roughly equal. With
as well as highlight the role of higher underlying inflation still expected to be
energy prices in those developments. relatively low, the Committee believes that
policy accommodation can be removed at a
They also agreed to retain the assess­
pace that is likely to be measured. Nonethe­
ments adopted at the June meeting that
less, the Committee will respond to changes
the risks to the Committee’s goals of in economic prospects as needed to fulfill its
sustainable economic growth and price obligation to maintain price stability.

208 91st Annual Report, 2004
Votes for this action: Messrs. Green- Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
span, Geithner, Bernanke, Ms. Bies, Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig, Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian- Ms. Johnson, Economist
alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this Mr. Stockton, Economist
action: None.
Messrs. Connors, Fuhrer, Hakkio,
It was agreed that the next meeting of Howard, Madigan, Slifman, Tracy,
the Committee would be held on Tues­ and Wilcox, Associate Economists
day, September 21, 2004.
The meeting adjourned at 1:00 p.m. Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open
Market Account
Vincent R. Reinhart
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division
Secretary
of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
Meeting Held on Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer,
Associate Directors, Division
September 21, 2004
of Research and Statistics,
Board of Governors
A meeting of the Federal Open Market
Committee was held in the offices of
Messrs. Clouse and Whitesell, Deputy
the Board of Governors of the Federal
Associate Directors, Division of
Reserve System in Washington, D.C., Monetary Affairs, Board of
on Tuesday, September 21, 2004, at Governors
9:00 a.m.
Mr. English, Assistant Director,
Present: Division of Monetary Affairs,
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman Board of Governors
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman
Mr. Bernanke Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser,
Ms. Bies Division of Research and
Mr. Ferguson Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Gramlich
Mr. Hoenig Ms. Danker, Special Assistant to the
Mr. Kohn Board, Division of Monetary
Ms. Minehan Affairs, Board of Governors
Mr. Olson
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Small, Project Manager,
Mr. Poole
Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Messrs. McTeer, Moskow, Santomero,
and Stern, Alternate Members
Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the
of the Federal Open Market
Board, Office of Board Members,
Committee
Board of Governors
Messrs. Guynn and Lacker, and
Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Ms. Weinbach, Senior Economist,
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Division of Monetary Affairs,
Richmond, and San Francisco Board of Governors
respectively
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst,
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist Division of Monetary Affairs,
Mr. Bernard, Deputy Secretary Board of Governors

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, September 209
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat showed a moderate gain in payrolls.
Assistant, Division of Monetary After contracting in June, industrial
Affairs, Board of Governors
production strengthened modestly on
average in July and August, and the
Mr. Barron, First Vice President,
increases were widespread across sec­
Federal Reserve Bank of Atlanta
tors. Consumer spending rose sharply in
July, housing activity increased further
Mr. Judd, Executive Vice President,
Federal Reserve Bank of in August, and business outlays picked
San Francisco up last month. Core consumer price
inflation moderated in June and July,
Messrs. Eisenbeis, Evans, and and a decline in energy prices further
Goodfriend, Mses. Mester and damped overall inflation in July.
Perelmuter, and Messrs. Rolnick
The labor market improved in
and Rosenblum, Senior Vice
August, and the unemployment rate
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
of Atlanta, Chicago, Richmond, edged down to 5.4 percent. Private non­
Philadelphia, New York, farm payrolls grew moderately, with
Minneapolis, and Dallas gains registered in the manufacturing,
respectively
construction, financial activities, and
nonbusiness services categories. In addi­
Messrs. Bryan and Gavin, Vice
tion, the figures for June and July were
Presidents, Federal Reserve Banks
revised upward and suggested that the
of Cleveland and St. Louis
respectively deceleration in hiring over that period
was not as abrupt as had been pre­
By unanimous vote, the minutes of viously thought. The average workweek
the meeting of the Federal Open Market was unchanged in August from the
Committee held on August 10, 2004, upward-revised July level and was a bit
were approved. higher than its second-quarter average.
The Manager of the System Open The labor force participation rate edged
Market Account reported on recent down in August.
developments in foreign exchange mar­ Total industrial production advanced
kets. There were no open market oper­ modestly on average in July and August,
ations in foreign currencies for the down slightly from its second-quarter
System’s account in the period since the pace. The increases in manufacturing
previous meeting. production since the end of the second
The Manager also reported on recent quarter were widespread. Output of
developments in domestic financial mar­ motor vehicles and parts jumped in
kets and on System open market trans­ August. Excluding motor vehicles and
actions in government securities and parts, the expansion in manufacturing
securities issued or fully guaranteed output was brisk in July but more sub­
by federal agencies during the period dued in August. In the high-tech sector,
August 10, 2004, through September 20, computer production continued to rise
2004. By unanimous vote, the Commit­ in August, and the output of communi­
tee ratified these transactions. cations equipment posted its fourth con­
The information reviewed at this secutive monthly increase. In contrast,
meeting suggested that economic output at utilities declined further in July
growth regained some vigor in recent and August, while mining-related pro­
months after having slowed in late duction was about flat on average over
spring. The August labor market report those same months. The rate of capacity

210 91st Annual Report, 2004
utilization ticked up in July from its in the second quarter, and the available
average over the first half of the year data pointed to a similar advance more
and remained steady in August. recently. Spending was being supported
Real consumer spending grew sharply by the continued gains in business out­
in July after having slowed in the sec­ put, low financing costs, ongoing price
ond quarter, and the available indi­ declines for high-tech capital, and the
cators suggest that spending held fairly corporate sector’s large cushion of liq­
steady in August. Expenditures on uid assets. Spending on transportation
goods jumped in July and moderated equipment and other capital goods was
in August, while spending on services brisk in the second quarter, although
moved up somewhat in July. Purchases expenditures in the high-tech sector
of motor vehicles surged in July and decelerated. In July, shipments of capi­
fell back in August. For the two months tal goods excluding aircraft fell sub­
together, the average pace of these out­ stantially from the rate seen in the first
lays exceeded that seen in the first half half of the year, but orders were rela­
of the year, reflecting in part a further tively strong. Real business investment
sweetening of incentives. Real dispos­ in nonresidential structures remained
able income was up slightly in July, as depressed, but the most recent data pro­
increases in compensation were largely vided a sign of some improvement. In
offset by declines in other income cate­ the office sector, the vacancy rate came
gories. The latest readings on consumer in only a little below its recent peak,
confidence showed a drop in August although property values had inched up,
amid labor market slack and near-record and the vacancy rate for industrial space
gasoline prices, and a further slight also remained near its high. The retail
decline in September, but the readings sector, in contrast, continued to fare
for the third quarter averaged above better.
those for the second quarter. Excluding motor vehicles, the pace of
Housing activity increased further in inventory accumulation in July contin­
August. Housing starts for new single- ued at its second-quarter rate. A decline
family homes bounced up in July and in stocks in the retail trade segment was
remained about unchanged in August, more than offset by stockbuilding in
and starts of multi-family homes rose the manufacturing and wholesale trade
somewhat each month. Taken together, segments. Although the book value of
total housing starts in August reached manufacturing and trade inventories
the highest level in five months. Home rose appreciably in July, these gains
sales remained robust in July for both were again inflated by price increases in
existing and new homes, although sales the petroleum sector. Inventory–sales
were below the monthly peaks recorded ratios in the manufacturing sector, as
earlier in the year. Interest rates on in the retail and wholesale trade sectors
thirty-year conventional mortgages (excluding motor vehicles and parts),
receded over the past couple of months, remained about flat in July.
retracing much of the runup in rates that The U.S. international trade deficit
occurred earlier in the year. Weekly data reached a record high in June, bringing
on mortgage applications to purchase it to a new high in the second quarter
homes continued to move up, on aver­ as a percentage of nominal GDP. While
age, through mid-September. the deficit fell back in July, it remained
Business outlays for equipment and much above May’s reading. In June,
software increased at a significant pace exports fell sharply, with declines wide­

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, September 211
spread, while imports rose, owing in registered an increase in the second
part to a surge in petroleum imports. In quarter.
July, exports registered a modest recov­ At its meeting on August 10, 2004,
ery, driven by capital goods, industrial the Federal Open Market Committee
supplies, and automotive products, decided to increase the target federal
while the value of imports fell with the funds rate by 25 basis points, to 11⁄
2
per­
sharp decline in oil imports. Economic cent, and to retain its assessment of bal­
activity in the major foreign industrial anced risks with respect to sustainable
countries continued to expand in the sec­ economic growth and price stability. In
ond quarter, although growth slowed in its announcement, the Committee noted
Japan and in the euro area. Indicators to that output growth had moderated in
date for the third quarter were mixed. recent months and that the pace of
Core consumer prices edged up improvement in labor market conditions
slightly over the months of June and had slowed, but that the softness likely
July, as inflation in both goods and ser­ owed importantly to the substantial rise
vices moderated. The core PCE price in energy prices. It also noted that while
index was flat in July but, like the core inflation was somewhat elevated this
CPI, was up a bit on balance over June year, a portion of the pickup seemed
and July. The twelve-month change in to reflect transitory factors. The Com­
core consumer prices based on either mittee went on to comment that the
measure was somewhat higher this economy appeared poised to resume
July than for the same period last year. a stronger pace of expansion going
Retail energy prices fell in July, led forward, that it continued to believe
by a drop in gasoline prices after large that policy accommodation could be
gains in a number of earlier months. removed at a pace that was likely to be
During the summer, gasoline inven­ measured, and that it would respond
tories climbed above seasonal norms to changes in economic prospects as
because of lower demand and increased needed to fulfill its obligation to main­
imports, and the resulting downward tain price stability.
pressure on margins led gasoline prices Although the Committee’s decision
to fall even as crude oil prices moved to raise the intended level of the federal
higher. Owing to the decline in energy funds rate by 25 basis points was widely
prices in July, inflation in overall con­ anticipated in financial markets, the
sumer prices slowed that month. In accompanying statement was read as
August, households’ expectations for setting a more optimistic tone about eco­
consumer inflation in the year ahead nomic prospects than had been antici­
edged lower for the second consecutive pated and prompted investors to mark
month. Meanwhile, after a small rise up their expectations for the near-term
in July, the prices of finished goods path of policy. That sentiment was
faced by producers moved down a apparently reinforced over the remain­
bit in August. Turning to labor costs, der of the period by the comments of
hourly compensation in the nonfarm several Federal Reserve officials and
business sector rose at a faster pace in the release of the August employment
the second quarter than it did in the first, report, which seemed to convey the
but the advance was in line with the view that the economy was emerging
average rate of increase over the preced­ from its ‘‘soft patch.’’ As a result, policy
ing four quarters. Unit labor costs mea­ rate expectations for the next two quar­
sured at nonfinancial corporations also ters ended the intermeeting period

212 91st Annual Report, 2004
slightly firmer. Longer-term policy this year to modest restraint next year.
expectations, however, moved notice­ Consumer spending was expected to
ably lower, reflecting the release of rela­ pick up in conjunction with the strength­
tively benign readings on inflation and ening labor market and associated gains
the Chairman’s comments on the infla­ in wages and salaries that would offset
tion outlook in testimony to the House the effects of an anticipated rise in the
Budget Committee. In line with these savings rate from its recent low level.
revised expectations for the path of pol­ The contour of business spending was
icy, the term structure of interest rates expected to be affected by the expiration
flattened over the intermeeting period, of the partial-expensing tax provisions
as the two-year Treasury yield ended at year-end, which gave an incentive for
about unchanged and the ten-year Trea­ businesses to invest more heavily this
sury yield dropped somewhat. While year. Supported by a favorable financ­
credit spreads on investment-grade cor­ ing environment, ample stocks of liquid
porate bonds narrowed a bit, spreads assets, and the ongoing need to replace
on speculative-grade issues fell signifi­ aging or obsolete equipment and soft­
cantly more, particularly in riskier seg­ ware, investment outlays were expected
ments of the market, probably reflecting to grow robustly once the tax-related
greater confidence about prospects in swings were completed. After the cur­
the business sector. Further evidence of rent period of below-average employ­
such confidence was visible in equity ment gains, employers were expected to
markets, where broad indexes advanced hire at a relatively robust pace next year.
51⁄
2
to 71⁄
2
percent. The exchange value At the same time, as labor market con­
of the dollar against other major curren­ ditions improved, individuals who had
cies was about unchanged over the inter- withdrawn from the labor force were
meeting period. thought likely to return, so that job gains
M2 balances were about flat on aver­ were expected to have a muted effect on
age over the previous two months: After the unemployment rate. Consumer price
contracting a bit in July, M2 expanded inflation was projected to remain at or
slightly in August. Money growth was below its current level. Slack in resource
damped by a rise in the opportunity cost utilization, continued rapid growth in
of holding M2 assets (as typically occurs structural productivity, and the pass-
in periods of policy tightening). In addi­ through of declining energy prices were
tion, the lift to M2 from mortgage refi­ expected to contribute to the restraint on
nancings in evidence during the spring inflation.
was likely still unwinding over the past In the Committee’s discussion of
couple of months, depressing the growth current and prospective developments,
of liquid deposits. Business loans at the members agreed that the economy
banks expanded in August for the third had strengthened somewhat after going
consecutive month. through a ‘‘soft patch’’ in late spring
The staff forecast prepared for this and early summer. Recent data and
meeting suggested that the economy anecdotal information suggested solid
would continue expanding at a solid growth ahead, but at a pace that could
pace through the end of 2006. Labor well be less brisk than previously antici­
market improvements and accommoda­ pated. Consumer spending appeared
tive monetary policy were seen as coun­ to have rebounded in the third quarter.
terbalancing the drag from the swing in Business investment also was robust,
fiscal policy from considerable stimulus but executives, especially those at larger

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, September 213
firms, seemed more cautious about the noted that the pace of technological
outlook than they had been several advance could be slowing a bit, trim­
months ago. Although higher energy ming the rate of decline in the cost of
prices had played an important role in capital for high-tech equipment and
damping growth, questions remained software. High vacancy rates for office
about the reasons for the shortfall from buildings and industrial structures would
expectations held this spring, and sev­ likely continue to weigh on nonresi­
eral policymakers remarked that their dential investment, although activity in
uncertainty about the likely pace of that sector was showing some signs of
the expansion going forward had risen. revival.
Members commented that the benign Committee members interpreted
incoming data on prices tended to con­ recent data and anecdotal information
firm their previous judgment that the as indicating that growth in consumer
increase in inflation earlier in the year spending was rebounding from its rela­
had importantly reflected temporary fac­ tively slow rate of late spring. They saw
tors and that core inflation would prob­ household spending as most likely con­
ably remain relatively low. tinuing to expand at a solid pace going
In their discussion of developments forward. Gains in nominal income,
in key sectors of the economy, policy- partly resulting from gradual increases
makers agreed that business investment in employment, were expected to con­
would most likely continue to provide tinue to support consumer spending and
considerable impetus to the overall eco­ low interest rates to buoy residential
nomic expansion going forward. The investment. However, members per­
anticipated further expansion of aggre­ ceived several possible sources of down­
gate demand should boost investment. side risk to household spending. In par­
Also, low real interest rates, strong busi­ ticular, households might hold back on
ness balance sheets, and high levels of spending in an attempt to increase their
profits and cash flow were expected to saving, which had fallen to a very low
support capital spending. However, the level relative to income. The ebbing of
extent to which the federal tax provision stimulus from last year’s tax cuts also
permitting partial expensing of most could tend to slow growth in consumer
investment expenditures had been boost­ spending. And a failure of employment
ing capital expenditures was difficult to accelerate as expected could under­
to discern, and it was possible that the mine consumer confidence as well as
expiration of that provision at year-end hold down the growth in personal
could result in a fairly sharp slowing in income.
investment, at least for a time. In addi­ With regard to the external sector,
tion, recent discussions with business foreign economies were seen as gener­
contacts, as well as a range of statistical ally expanding steadily, with the high
information, suggested a persisting ten­ level of crude oil prices apparently hav­
dency for corporate executives to limit ing restrained growth abroad somewhat
capital spending commitments. The rea­ less than in the United States. Still,
sons for this tendency were unclear, but expectations for foreign economic
a continuing focus on corporate gover­ growth had been marked down some­
nance issues might still be playing a what, with adverse implications for U.S.
role, and business concerns about terror­ exports and for overall U.S. growth.
ism and other geopolitical risks might Indeed, some policymakers noted that
have risen this year. Some members also domestic demand in several major U.S.

214 91st Annual Report, 2004
trading partners was relatively weak and relatively high, energy prices had
that aggregate demand in those econo­ declined noticeably from record levels
mies was being sustained importantly in recent weeks, and the effects of the
by exports to the United States. That energy price shock on inflation were
pattern was contributing to a worri­ expected to wane. In this regard, a num­
some further widening of the U.S. trade ber of policymakers commented that
and current account balances, and the data on consumer and producer infla­
Committee discussed the significance tion had generally come in at or below
of wide external deficits and various expectations over the intermeeting
adjustments that might occur in the pro­ period, tending to confirm the Commit­
cess of their return to more sustainable tee’s judgment that the upturn in infla­
levels. tion earlier in the year had owed impor­
Committee members generally tantly to temporary factors. Moreover,
viewed labor market conditions as hav­ inflation expectations appeared to be
ing improved modestly of late. Although well-contained, although those expecta­
payroll growth had been weak in June tions probably were conditioned in part
and July, it registered a somewhat on investors’ anticipation that the stance
better performance in August, and initial of monetary policy would likely be
claims for unemployment insurance tightened over time.
continued to hover around relatively low In the Committee’s discussion of pol­
levels. Some members noted a mismatch icy for the intermeeting period, all of
between demand and supply for certain the members favored raising the target
types of labor. In particular, unskilled for the federal funds rate by 25 basis
workers were said to be having con­ points to 13⁄
4
percent at this meeting.
siderable difficulty finding jobs, while The expansion evidently was resilient
firms were facing challenges in hiring and self-sustaining and appeared no
workers with some specific skills, longer to require the unusual degree of
including truck drivers and heavy- monetary stimulus that had previously
equipment operators. Partly as a result, been necessary. A gradual increase in
businesses in a few sectors, such as interest rates seemed likely to be con­
transportation and construction, report­ sistent with continued solid economic
edly were experiencing constraints on growth that would be sufficient to erode
their output. Overall, however, some remaining margins of slack in resource
slack appeared to remain in labor mar­ utilization over time. In view of these
kets. Looking forward, policymakers considerations, the Committee believed
expected gradual improvement in labor that another modest reduction in the
market conditions as the economy degree of monetary policy accom­
expanded. However, anecdotal informa­ modation at today’s meeting was war­
tion suggested that many firms remained ranted. With today’s action, the real
quite cautious about expanding payrolls, federal funds rate—measured as the
citing, among other factors, continued difference between the nominal funds
uncertainty about economic prospects rate and a moving average of core PCE
and the high cost of providing health inflation—would move slightly into
care benefits. positive territory.
Partly reflecting the likely persistence With regard to the Committee’s
of some economic slack, members announcement to be released after the
expected inflation to stay low. Although meeting, the members agreed that the
non-energy commodity prices remained statement should indicate that, after

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, November 215
moderating earlier in the year, partly in The vote encompassed approval of
response to the substantial rise in energy the paragraph below for inclusion in
prices, output growth appeared to have the press statement to be released shortly
regained some traction and that labor after the meeting:
market conditions had improved mod­
estly. In addition, policymakers con­ The Committee perceives the upside
curred that the statement should indicate and downside risks to the attainment of both
sustainable growth and price stability for the
that inflation and inflation expectations
next few quarters to be roughly equal. With
had eased in recent months. They also
underlying inflation expected to be relatively
agreed again to characterize the risks low, the Committee believes that policy
to sustainable growth and price stability accommodation can be removed at a pace
as balanced. Members commented that that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless,
recent evidence had boosted their confi­ the Committee will respond to changes in
economic prospects as needed to fulfill its
dence that moderate economic growth
obligation to maintain price stability.
would continue and that inflation would
be contained. With aggregate demand
Votes for this action: Messrs. Green-
probably expanding at least as rapidly as span, Geithner, Bernanke, Ms. Bies,
the economy’s potential to produce over Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig,
the next several quarters, policymakers Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian-
alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this
continued to see economic conditions
action: None.
as likely to warrant a further reduction
in policy accommodation in coming
The Committee noted that Deputy
quarters. However, in the view of many
Secretary Normand R.V. Bernard had
members, policy actions would need to
announced his intention to retire in the
be increasingly keyed to incoming data.
period before the next FOMC meet­
Indeed, it was noted that market partici­
ing, following more than four decades
pants now appeared to anticipate some
at the Federal Reserve. The Committee
slowing in the pace of policy firming
thanked Mr. Bernard for his dedication,
before long and did not interpret the
integrity, and steadfast support through
removal of policy accommodation at a
the more than 345 FOMC meetings he
measured rate as necessarily involving
attended during his career.
the same policy action at each meeting.
It was agreed that the next meeting
At the conclusion of the discussion,
of the Committee would be held on
the Committee voted to authorize and
Wednesday, November 10, 2004.
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New
The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.
York, until it was instructed otherwise,
to execute transactions in the System
Vincent R. Reinhart
Account in accordance with the follow­
Secretary
ing domestic policy directive.
The Federal Open Market Committee
seeks monetary and financial conditions that Meeting Held on
will foster price stability and promote sus­ November 10, 2004
tainable growth in output. To further its long-
run objectives, the Committee in the imme­
A meeting of the Federal Open Market
diate future seeks conditions in reserve
Committee was held in the offices of
markets consistent with increasing the fed­
eral funds rate to an average of around the Board of Governors of the Federal
13⁄4 percent. Reserve System in Washington, D.C.,

216 91st Annual Report, 2004
on Wednesday, November 10, 2004, at Mr. English, Assistant Director,
9:00 a.m. Division of Monetary Affairs,
Board of Governors
Present:
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser,
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman Division of Research and
Mr. Bernanke Statistics, Board of Governors
Ms. Bies
Mr. Ferguson Mr. Brady, Section Chief, Division of
Mr. Gramlich Monetary Affairs, Board of
Mr. Hoenig Governors
Mr. Kohn
Ms. Minehan
Mr. Small, Project Manager, Division
Mr. Olson
of Monetary Affairs, Board of
Ms. Pianalto
Governors
Mr. Poole
Messrs. Moskow, Santomero, and Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the
Stern, Alternate Members of the Board, Office of Board Members,
Federal Open Market Committee Board of Governors
Messrs. Guynn, Lacker, and Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst,
Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Division of Monetary Affairs,
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Board of Governors
Richmond, and San Francisco
respectively Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat
Assistant, Division of Monetary
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Ms. Holcomb and Mr. Rasdall, First
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Banks of Dallas and Kansas City
Ms. Johnson, Economist
respectively
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Connors, Fuhrer, Hakkio, Messrs. Eisenbeis, Estrella, Evans,
Howard, Madigan, Slifman, and Goodfriend, Ms. Mester,
Sniderman, Rasche, and Wilcox, Messrs. Rosenblum and Williams,
Associate Economists Senior Vice Presidents, Federal
Reserve Banks of Atlanta,
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open New York, Chicago, Richmond,
Market Account Philadelphia, Dallas, and
San Francisco respectively
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division
of Research and Statistics, Mr. Hilton, Vice President, Federal
Board of Governors Reserve Bank of New York
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer,
Associate Directors, Division Federal Reserve Bank of
of Research and Statistics, Minneapolis
Board of Governors
By unanimous vote, the minutes of
Messrs. Clouse and Whitesell, Deputy
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Associate Directors, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Committee held on September 21, 2004,
Governors were approved.

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, November 217
By unanimous vote, the Federal Open current quarter despite the restraint
Market Committee approved the selec­ imparted on real incomes and consumer
tion of Deborah J. Danker as Deputy confidence from higher oil prices. How­
Secretary of the Committee to serve ever, industrial production was flat in
until the selection of a successor at the recent months, and hiring activity was
first regularly scheduled meeting after lackluster through September before
December 31, 2004. advancing sharply in October. Inflation
The Manager of the System Open measures continued at low levels
Market Account reported on recent through September.
developments in foreign exchange mar­ Employment gains were subdued in
kets. There were no open market opera­ the third quarter, but showed substantial
tions in foreign currencies for the Sys­ strength in October. Job growth last
tem’s account in the period since the month was fairly widespread, although
previous meeting. heavy hiring in the construction sector
The Manager reported on recent was due partly to efforts to repair dam­
developments in domestic financial mar­ age from the four hurricanes that hit
kets and on System open market trans­ the southeastern states. Employment
actions in government securities and increases were particularly large in the
securities issued or fully guaranteed by financial and services sectors. How­
federal agencies during the period Sep­ ever, a small decline was registered in
tember 21, 2004, through November 9, employment in the manufacturing sec­
2004. By unanimous vote, the Commit­ tor. The average workweek held steady
tee ratified these transactions. in October at its third-quarter level and
The Manager also discussed the pres­ was a bit above the average for the
sures on the federal funds rate prior to, second quarter. Despite the strong
and volatility in the rate that has ensued increase in payroll employment, the
at times after, recent FOMC meetings as household survey indicated a slight
depository institutions sought to satisfy increase in the unemployment rate to
a larger portion of their reserve require­ 5.5 percent in October.
ments before anticipated increases in the Industrial production was about un­
FOMC’s target funds rate. The Commit­ changed in September, likely restrained
tee agreed that the Desk would continue by the hurricanes that month. A decline
to conduct open market operations as it in manufacturing was about offset by a
has in such situations—leaning against jump in utilities output and expansion in
anticipatory pressures in the funds mar­ high-tech industries. The available data
ket while taking account of the reserve suggested that industrial production
management implications of such opera­ rebounded in October. Capacity utili­
tions for the remainder of the reserve zation was unchanged in September at
maintenance period. about the third-quarter average but was
The information received at this up from its level earlier in the year.
meeting suggested that the economy Consumer spending advanced
expanded at a moderate pace over the strongly in the third quarter from the
third quarter. Low interest rates helped sluggish pace of the second quarter. The
to maintain a buoyant housing market acceleration reflected a surge in expen­
and spending by both consumers and ditures on motor vehicles that owed
businesses was firm. Available informa­ partly to attractive incentives, but spend­
tion suggested that the recent tempo of ing on other durables and nondurables
economic activity continued into the was also up. Spending on services was

218 91st Annual Report, 2004
steady for the third quarter on average, imports. The deficit narrowed in Sep­
but advanced in September on a boost to tember, however, as imports fell while
electricity consumption related to unsea­ exports expanded moderately. The lower
sonably warm weather. Real disposable level of imports in September mainly
income slowed in the third quarter to a reflected declines in the petroleum and
moderate pace and was flat in Septem­ services categories. Economic expan­
ber, probably in part because of effects sion abroad on average appeared to slow
of the hurricanes. Measures of consumer in the third quarter, although it remained
confidence moved down in Septem­ solid.
ber and again in October. Activity in Consumer prices continued to
housing markets remained generally advance at a moderate rate in recent
strong in September, supported by months, although both overall and core
favorable mortgage rates. Although consumer price measures rose a bit
starts of single-family homes slowed faster in the twelve months ending in
to well below the level of preceding September 2004 than in the year-earlier
months, multifamily starts rose and sales period. Expectations of near-term infla­
of both existing and new homes were tion picked up in October, consistent
elevated. with the increase in energy prices. Labor
Business investment spending on costs continued to rise moderately. The
equipment and software continued to increase in the employment cost index
expand at a rapid pace in the third quar­ for private compensation over the third
ter, supported by positive fundamentals quarter was a bit below the average pace
that included robust business output, of the last two years.
low interest rates and readily available At its meeting of September 21, 2004,
credit, and healthy business balance the Federal Open Market Committee
sheets. Outlays for high-tech equipment adopted a directive that called for con­
and software stepped down in the third ditions in reserves markets consistent
quarter, but spending on other types with increasing the federal funds rate
of equipment, including transportation, to an average of around 13⁄
4
percent. In
was at a high level. At the same time, its public statement, the Committee
investment in nonresidential structures, expressed a belief that monetary policy
which had turned up in the second quar­ remained accommodative even after this
ter, softened in the third quarter. Con­ tightening, and judged the upside and
struction spending for retail buildings downside risks to the attainment of both
and warehouses advanced, but high sustainable growth and price stability
vacancy rates for office buildings held over the next few quarters to be roughly
back investment in that sector. equal. The Committee noted its expecta­
Accumulation of nonfarm inventories tion that the underlying rate of inflation
excluding motor vehicles picked up would continue to be low and that pol­
smartly over the third quarter. The level icy accommodation could be removed
of sales also rose, however, keeping at a pace that is likely to be measured,
inventory–sales ratios fairly steady at but also stated that it would nonetheless
low levels. respond to changes in economic pros­
The U.S. international trade deficit pects as needed to fulfill its obligation to
rose in the third quarter on average, maintain price stability.
reflecting some weakening in the growth The FOMC’s decision in September
of service exports and an increase in to raise the intended level of the federal
the price and quantity of petroleum funds rate 25 basis points and its atten­

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, November 219
dant public statement were anticipated partial-expensing provisions of the tax
by the market, and the reaction was code. Oil prices were anticipated to
muted. Over subsequent weeks, how­ decline somewhat with the repair of
ever, a reference in the minutes of the hurricane-related damage to oil infra­
August FOMC meeting to the need for structure in the Gulf of Mexico, leading
‘‘significant cumulative tightening’’ and to some slowing in inflation. With the
comments by the Chairman and other economy expected to advance over the
FOMC members, which were read as coming year at a rate a bit above its
minimizing the likely damping effect on longer-run potential, the pace of hiring
the economy of higher energy prices, should firm and the unemployment rate
led markets to raise their expectations of should edge lower. In response to rising
forthcoming policy tightenings. These real incomes, consumer spending was
expectations were boosted further by the forecast to strengthen after the early part
release of the strong employment data of next year. The staff expected business
for October. The shift in the market’s investment spending to slow sharply
outlook for monetary policy contributed early next year as partial-expensing pro­
to noticeable upward pressure on short- visions expired, but then to pick up
term interest rates, and most long- noticeably in response to favorable
term rates also moved up. Yields on financing conditions, ample business
investment-grade corporate bonds rose liquidity, and the need to replace or
about in line with those on comparable- upgrade aging equipment and software.
maturity Treasuries, but yields on In the Committee’s discussion of cur­
speculative-grade bonds edged down rent and prospective developments, the
and equity markets posted strong members generally expressed assess­
advances. In foreign exchange markets, ments that economic expansion in the
the dollar declined appreciably, appar­ neighborhood of the rate of growth of
ently in part on continuing market con­ the economy’s potential appeared to
cerns about the financing of the U.S. have become even more firmly estab­
current account deficit. lished over recent months, despite the
M2 expanded in October at about the drag from higher energy prices. Recent
sluggish pace of the third quarter. The data and anecdotal information sug­
growth of M2 was restrained in recent gested that spending by businesses and
months by increases in its opportunity households had been reasonably robust
cost. Rates paid on its liquid asset com­ of late, supported by accommodative
ponents have lagged increases in market financial conditions, continuing gains in
rates associated with the three monetary productivity, and increasing employ­
tightenings since midyear. ment. Looking forward, economic fun­
In the staff forecast prepared for this damentals appeared to be favorable for
meeting, the economy was seen as likely continued solid growth, and while fiscal
to expand next year at around this year’s stimulus would abate next year, a flat­
solid pace under an assumption of gen­ tening out of energy prices, as markets
erally accommodative financial condi­ seemed to anticipate, would bolster eco­
tions. Recent declines in the dollar were nomic expansion. However, significant
expected to support domestic economic uncertainties surrounded the prospects
activity by boosting net exports. Fiscal for energy prices and fiscal policy, as
policy was expected to become much well as the external sector. The Commit­
less stimulative after the current quarter, tee anticipated that underlying inflat­
owing to the expiration of the temporary ion pressures would remain contained

220 91st Annual Report, 2004
as monetary accommodation was with­ recent months, Committee members
drawn. Core consumer price inflation reported contacts with retail merchants
had been quite damped on average in that suggested mixed readings on the
recent months and longer-term inflation ongoing pace of consumer buying. The
expectations remained well anchored, effect of higher energy prices on real
despite further increases in energy prices incomes was likely still restraining con­
and prospective increases in near-term sumer spending. Moreover, the stock of
headline inflation. automobiles owned by households had
In their discussion of key sectors of risen substantially in recent years, and
the economy, policymakers noted that the willingness of households to pur­
business investment had been expand­ chase autos was seen as continuing to
ing robustly and was likely to continue depend importantly on the provision of
to be buoyed by the strength of produc­ incentives by manufacturers. Home buy­
tivity and profits. Some sectors, such as ing and residential construction gener­
trucks and heavy equipment, had experi­ ally remained robust, although a few
enced rapid growth. However, even after members pointed to some moderation in
taking account of likely effects of higher activity in selected markets. It was noted
oil prices, the pace of overall business that a slowdown in the rate of increase
investment spending was still boosting in home prices going forward might lead
GDP growth somewhat less than might households to increase their desired sav­
have been expected given accommoda­ ing. However, the risk of any signifi­
tive financial conditions and tax incen­ cant drop-off in the growth of consumer
tives. Some uncertainties, such as those spending would likely diminish with a
associated with the election, had been sustained rebound in the pace of hiring.
resolved, but others persisted, including In their comments on fiscal policy,
the prospects for oil prices and their Committee members indicated an
consequences for the economy. Many expectation that the economic stimulus
business firms seemed hesitant about provided in recent years by discretion­
large-scale investment to increase pro­ ary fiscal measures was likely to fade
ductive capacity and hiring commit­ next year. However, considerable uncer­
ments, perhaps partly reflecting an envi­ tainty surrounded the likely evolution of
ronment of greater scrutiny regarding the federal budget. Members stressed
corporate governance and internal con­ the importance of fiscal discipline to
trol systems. The high-tech sector, and facilitate a better balance between net
investment in information technology national saving and investment and
more generally, had been growing less thereby promote an adjustment of the
rapidly of late and was seen as posing a imbalance in the current account of the
possible downside risk to the outlook. If balance of payments.
the recent slower rate of price declines Committee members noted that the
on high-tech products implied a softer balance of trade had improved a little
underlying pace of technological in September and commented that the
change, both the outlook for investment decline in the value of the dollar over
demand and the prospects for persist­ the past few years had been boosting
ing high trend growth in productivity demand seen by some exporting firms.
could be damped relative to previous However, with foreign economic growth
expectations. moderating and the large excess of
While acknowledging data indicating imports over exports, members gener­
a rebound in consumption spending in ally viewed the prospects for net exports

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, November 221
as likely to provide a continuing drag on outlook included possible further depre­
U.S. economic expansion. One implica­ ciation of the dollar or increases in
tion of this outlook was that U.S. exter­ energy prices. In addition, a few mem­
nal indebtedness relative to GDP would bers cited the possibility that the ele­
be increasing further. vated pace of trend productivity growth
Committee members remarked on experienced since the mid-1990s would
signs of improvement in labor market begin to slow.
conditions. While acknowledging the In the Committee’s discussion of the
need to be cautious about readings from setting of policy, all of the members
a single labor market report, members favored raising the target for the federal
saw the increase in payroll employment funds rate by 25 basis points to 2 per­
in October and the upward revisions cent at this meeting. The economy
to previous months as encouraging. Fur­ appeared to be continuing to expand at
thermore, business contacts in several a moderate pace that was likely to be
regions were indicating greater diffi­ rapid enough to gradually reduce mar­
culty in filling some types of positions, gins of underutilized resources. In that
both skilled and unskilled. Nevertheless, regard, the Committee was encouraged
many firms evidently remained slow to by more evident signs of improvement
expand hiring, in part because of rising in hiring. The Committee felt that the
benefit costs. One member commented outlook justified the further removal of
on the performance of a few key indus­ the policy accommodation that had been
tries, citing evidence that the job losses appropriate when the economic expan­
since the business cycle peak had sion was more tentative. Today’s action
been driven primarily by weak demand would move the real funds rate, mea­
rather than productivity improvements. sured using core PCE inflation, toward a
Although the extent of economic slack more positive setting.
was uncertain, some members indicated In discussing the FOMC announce­
a sense that the economy needed to ment for this meeting and going for­
grow faster than trend in order to take ward, several members commented that
up remaining unused resources. policy actions would likely become
Wage and price pressures were gen­ increasingly dependent on incoming
erally still modest. While some firms data and their implications for future
reportedly were finding it easier to pass activity and prices. This might imply a
higher oil and other commodity costs on more gradual path of tightening going
to their business customers, most busi­ forward than that of the last several
ness contacts indicated considerable months, as for example now seemed to
difficulty in passing cost increases on be built into the term structure of inter­
to consumers. Longer-term inflation est rates, or it might mean that the Com­
expectations had remained reasonably mittee on occasion would need to firm
low, helping to restrain the spillover of policy more rapidly. A few members felt
elevated energy prices to the prices of that, because of greater uncertainties, it
other goods and services. Some mem­ might become appropriate eventually
bers noted that any remaining resource to move away from the recent practice
slack would probably exert downward of providing guidance about the likely
pressure on inflation and that the depre­ future path of policy, while others
ciation of the dollar seemed to be having emphasized the desirability of continu­
a muted effect on import prices to date. ing to be as informative as possible
However, upside risks to the inflation about the Committee’s perceived out­

222 91st Annual Report, 2004
look. For now, most members agreed sustainable growth and price stability for the
that the current statement language next few quarters to be roughly equal. With
underlying inflation expected to be relatively
provided considerable flexibility with
low, the Committee believes that policy
regard to the Committee’s future actions
accommodation can be removed at a pace
and that market participants understood that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless,
that flexibility. As regards the announce­ the Committee will respond to changes in
ment to be released after the meeting, economic prospects as needed to fulfill its
most members felt that little change obligation to maintain price stability.
in the statement language was required.
Votes for this action: Messrs. Green-
Policymakers concurred that the state­
span, Geithner, Bernanke, Ms. Bies,
ment should indicate that output appears Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig,
to be growing at a moderate pace Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian-
despite the rise in energy prices, that alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this
action: None.
labor market conditions have improved,
and that inflation and longer-term infla­
It was agreed that the next meeting of
tion expectations remain well contained.
the Committee would be held on Tues­
They agreed to characterize the risks
day, December 14, 2004.
to sustainable growth and price stability
The meeting adjourned at 1:15 p.m.
as balanced and to reiterate that policy
accommodation could be removed at
a pace that was likely to be measured
Notation Vote
but that the Committee will respond
to changes in economic prospects as By notation vote completed on Decem­
needed to maintain price stability. ber 10, 2004, the Committee authorized
At the conclusion of the discussion, Mr. Santomero, an alternate member of
the Committee voted to authorize and the Committee, to accept the honor of
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New the title of ‘‘Cavaliere’’ to be awarded
York, until it was instructed otherwise, by the government of Italy.
to execute transactions in the System
Account in accordance with the follow­ Votes for this action: Messrs. Green-
ing domestic policy directive. span, Geithner, Bernanke, Ms. Bies,
Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig,
Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian-
The Federal Open Market Committee alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this
seeks monetary and financial conditions that action: None.
will foster price stability and promote sus­
tainable growth in output. To further its
Vincent R. Reinhart
long-run objectives, the Committee in the
Secretary
immediate future seeks conditions in reserve
markets consistent with increasing the
federal funds rate to an average of around
2 percent.
Meeting Held on
December 14, 2004
The vote encompassed approval of
the paragraph below for inclusion in the A meeting of the Federal Open Market
statement to be released shortly after the Committee was held in the offices of
meeting: the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System in Washington, D.C.,
The Committee perceives the upside and on Tuesday, December 14, 2004, at
downside risks to the attainment of both 9:00 a.m.

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, December 223
Present: Mr. Reifschneider, Deputy Associate
Mr. Greenspan, Chairman Director, Division of Research and
Mr. Geithner, Vice Chairman Statistics, Board of Governors
Mr. Bernanke
Ms. Bies Mr. English, Assistant Director,
Mr. Ferguson Division of Monetary Affairs,
Mr. Gramlich Board of Governors
Mr. Hoenig
Mr. Kohn Mr. Simpson, Senior Adviser, Division
Ms. Minehan of Research and Statistics,
Mr. Olson Board of Governors
Ms. Pianalto
Mr. Poole
Messrs. Brayton and Carpenter, Senior
Economists, Divisions of Research
Messrs. Moskow, Santomero, and and Statistics and Monetary
Stern, Alternate Members of the Affairs, respectively, Board of
Federal Open Market Committee Governors
Messrs. Guynn, Lacker, and Mr. Skidmore, Special Assistant to the
Ms. Yellen, Presidents of the Board, Office of Board Members,
Federal Reserve Banks of Atlanta, Board of Governors
Richmond, and San Francisco,
respectively
Mr. Luecke, Senior Financial Analyst,
Division of Monetary Affairs,
Ms. Holcomb, First Vice President, Board of Governors
Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas
Ms. Low, Open Market Secretariat
Mr. Reinhart, Secretary and Economist Assistant, Division of Monetary
Ms. Danker, Deputy Secretary Affairs, Board of Governors
Ms. Smith, Assistant Secretary
Mr. Alvarez, General Counsel
Ms. Cumming, First Vice President,
Mr. Baxter, Deputy General Counsel
Federal Reserve Bank of
Ms. Johnson, Economist
New York
Mr. Stockton, Economist
Messrs. Eisenbeis and Goodfriend,
Messrs. Connors, Fuhrer, Hakkio,
Ms. Mester, Messrs. Rosenblum
Howard, Madigan, Slifman,
and Williams, Senior Vice
Sniderman, Rasche, and Wilcox,
Presidents, Federal Reserve
Associate Economists
Banks of Atlanta, Richmond,
Philadelphia, Dallas and
Mr. Kos, Manager, System Open San Francisco, respectively
Market Account
Messrs. Elsasser, Peach, and Sullivan,
Mr. Ettin, Deputy Director, Division Vice Presidents, Federal Reserve
of Research and Statistics, Banks of New York, New York,
Board of Governors and Chicago, respectively
Messrs. Oliner and Struckmeyer, Mr. Weber, Senior Research Officer,
Associate Directors, Division Federal Reserve Bank of
of Research and Statistics, Minneapolis
Board of Governors
By unanimous vote, the minutes of
Messrs. Clouse and Whitesell, Deputy
the meeting of the Federal Open Market
Associate Directors, Division of
Monetary Affairs, Board of Committee held on November 10, 2004,
Governors were approved.

224 91st Annual Report, 2004
The Manager of the System Open in recent months. Output at mines
Market Account reported on recent increased noticeably for a second
developments in foreign exchange mar­ month, and manufacturing output posted
kets. There were no open market opera­ a moderate gain. At utilities, output fell
tions in foreign currencies for the Sys­ back in November after large increases
tem’s account in the period since the in the preceding two months. Utilization
previous meeting. The Manager also rates moved higher in November.
reported on recent developments in Consumer spending appeared to be
domestic financial markets and on Sys­ expanding at a more moderate pace in
tem open market transactions in gov­ the fourth quarter, after growing at a
ernment securities and securities issued robust rate in the third quarter. Although
or fully guaranteed by federal agencies sales of motor vehicles declined in
during the period November 10, 2004, November, spending on other goods
through December 13, 2004. By unani­ rose further after the large increase
mous vote, the Committee ratified these posted in October. Spending on services
transactions. continued to register solid gains. Real
The information received at this disposable income, restrained by sharply
meeting suggested that the economy higher energy prices, rose slightly. Even
expanded at a moderate pace over the so, measures of consumer confidence
third quarter and into the current quarter. were little changed and remained con­
Consumer spending was solid, and sistent with sustained increases in
investment spending remained strong. spending.
Manufacturing production increased at Activity in housing markets, buoyed
a modest pace, and employment gains by mortgage rates only modestly above
in October and November indicated that their recent lows, remained strong in
the labor market continued to improve October. Starts of both single-family and
gradually. Core inflation measures multifamily homes increased and were
remained subdued, albeit running at a above their third-quarter levels. Home
slightly higher pace than last year, sales remained at near-record levels.
owing, in part, to the indirect effects of Shipments of nondefense capital
higher energy prices. goods stepped up in October against the
Gains in employment were moderate backdrop of solid expansion in business
in November after a surge in October. output, low user cost of capital, and an
Job growth was fairly widespread, with ample stock of liquid assets in the cor­
the exception of slightly weak seasonal porate sector. Shipments of computers
hiring in the retail sector. Construction jumped in October, while gains in the
employment grew rapidly in November transportation sector were more modest.
even after the outsized gains in October Outside the high-tech and transportation
due to hurricane-related repair work. In sectors, shipments moved up consider­
contrast, employment in manufacturing ably in October from their robust third-
edged lower. The average workweek quarter pace. Outlays on nonresidential
in November was a touch below its construction edged down in October.
level in October, but still a bit above the After a rapid rise in the third quarter,
third-quarter average. The unemploy­ nonfarm inventories appeared to accu­
ment rate ticked down to 5.4 percent in mulate at a moderate pace in Octo­
November. ber. The book value of manufacturers’
Industrial production expanded a little inventories increased notably; however,
more slowly in November than it had shipments also stepped up, an increase

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, December 225
that left the inventory-shipments ratio in fulfill its obligation to maintain price
this sector unchanged. stability.
The U.S. international trade deficit The FOMC’s decision in November
widened in October, primarily because to raise the intended federal funds rate
of a surge in merchandise imports. Eco­ 25 basis points and its attendant pub­
nomic activity in most of the major for­ lic statement were apparently antici­
eign industrial countries slowed in the pated by the market, so that the reaction
third quarter, and data for the fourth was muted. Subsequently, higher-than­
quarter pointed to continued subpar expected inflation data, remarks by the
growth. Chairman that were viewed as pointing
Consumer prices jumped in October, to future rate increases, and the depre­
as hurricane damage contributed to ciation of the dollar all led market par­
higher prices for food and energy. For ticipants to price in a somewhat steeper
the twelve months ending in October, path for future policy. The upward revi­
consumer prices rose considerably faster sion in policy expectations prompted
than they did in the year-earlier period. modest increases in shorter-term Trea­
Core consumer prices increased much sury coupon security yields. The yield
more modestly in October than did on the ten-year Treasury note, however,
overall consumer prices, although the was unchanged on net. Yields on both
twelve-month change for core prices investment-grade and speculative-grade
was also somewhat higher than it was a corporate bonds edged lower. The value
year before. The employment cost index of the dollar relative to other major cur­
for private compensation advanced rencies declined.
moderately in the year ending the M2 accelerated a bit in November
third quarter, and the markup of prices from its sluggish pace in October, but
over labor costs remained somewhat growth in money continued to be
elevated. restrained by increases in its opportunity
At its meeting on November 10, cost. Rates paid on the liquid compo­
2004, the Federal Open Market Com­ nents of M2 lagged increases in market
mittee (FOMC) adopted a directive that rates associated with the monetary pol­
called for conditions in reserves markets icy tightenings this year. Bank credit
consistent with increasing the federal rebounded in November, with both secu­
funds rate to an average of around 2 per­ rities and loans registering gains.
cent. In its public statement, the Com­ In the staff forecast prepared for this
mittee expressed a belief that monetary meeting, the economy was seen as likely
policy remained accommodative even to expand at a moderate pace, supported
after this tightening and judged that the by accommodative monetary policy
upside and downside risks to the attain­ and financial conditions. Consistent with
ment of both sustainable growth and readings from futures markets, oil prices
price stability over the next few quarters were anticipated to edge lower. With
were roughly equal. The Committee economic activity projected to expand at
noted its expectation that the underly­ a pace a little above that of its longer-
ing rate of inflation would continue to run potential over the coming year,
be low and that policy accommodation hiring was projected to continue to
could be removed at a pace that is likely firm, causing the unemployment rate to
to be measured, but it also stated that edge down next year. The steep run-up
it would nonetheless respond to changes in housing prices, recent increases in
in economic prospects as needed to equity prices, and anticipated gains in

226 91st Annual Report, 2004
payrolls were viewed as likely to boost was expected to persist and, along with
the growth of consumption spending higher wealth and relatively low inter­
next year to a pace somewhat above that est rates, would support further gains
recorded this year. Business investment in spending by households. Rising
was anticipated to decline a bit early demand, elevated underlying productiv­
next year in light of the expiration of ity growth, and accommodative finan­
the partial-expensing tax provision at cial conditions should keep business
the end of 2004 but was projected to spending on a strong uptrend. With
resume vigorous growth in response to a some economic slack persisting and
favorable economic outlook, supportive longer-term inflation expectations well-
financial conditions, ample liquid assets anchored, inflation was anticipated to
in the corporate sector, and an ongoing remain subdued. A number of partici­
need to replace or upgrade aging equip­ pants cited the recent depreciation of
ment and software. Measures of total the dollar on foreign exchange markets,
consumer price inflation were expected elevated energy costs, and the possibil­
to decline from current levels reflect­ ity of a slowing in underlying productiv­
ing the direct effect of the downturn in ity growth as factors tending to boost
energy prices. By contrast, core infla­ the upside risks to their inflation out­
tion was seen in the staff forecast as look, though, on net, they saw the risks
remaining stable. The upward pressure to stable underlying inflation as still
on inflation from a slight step-down balanced.
in structural productivity growth and a In their discussion of important sec­
narrowing margin of resource slack was tors of the economy, participants noted
expected to be about counterbalanced that increasing equity and home prices
by diminishing pressure from the pass- had boosted household net worth, leav­
through of the earlier rise in energy ing consumers well positioned to main­
prices and decline in the dollar. tain a brisk pace of spending. Contin­
In their discussion of the economic ued gains in employment were thought
outlook, the participants at the meeting likely to provide additional support to
(the members of the Board of Gover­ spending by bolstering consumer con­
nors and the Reserve Bank Presidents fidence and income. Participants com­
or those acting in their place) generally mented that real disposable incomes
regarded incoming data since the prior should receive a further lift from the
meeting as consistent with an expecta­ recent drop in oil prices. Moreover,
tion that the economy would continue to intermediate- and long-term interest
expand at a pace that would likely prove rates remained low in both nominal
sufficient to reduce margins of underuti­ and real terms despite the recent firming
lized resources further. Recent data and in the stance of policy, encouraging
anecdotal information indicated that the spending on consumer durables and
economic expansion was firmly estab­ housing.
lished and had proven quite resilient Many of the fundamentals under­
in the face of rising oil prices and the lying the demand for capital goods—
reduction in policy accommodation. expanding output, a low cost of capital,
Although the November employment strong profits, and ample liquid assets—
report had been disappointing, when appeared quite favorable, and partici­
viewed over several months, labor mar­ pants generally were upbeat in their
ket conditions were generally seen as assessment of the prospects for invest­
gradually improving. That improvement ment. While some participants noted

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, December 227
that their business contacts seemed more tors anticipated further increases in the
confident about the future and that the federal funds rate over the coming year,
sense of caution previously evident in but intermediate- and long-term interest
business spending and hiring behavior rates along with financial conditions
seemed to be waning, others believed more generally had remained quite sup­
that many businesses remained quite portive of growth. A few participants
wary. Most participants acknowledged commented that the generally low level
some significant uncertainties in their of interest rates across a wide range
outlook, including the effects of the ex­ of maturities and the recent flattening of
piration of the partial-expensing provi­ the slope of the yield curve (measured
sion for investment at the end of 2004 as the spread between ten-and two-year
and recent indications of a softening in Treasury yields) might signal that
high-tech spending in the United States expectations of longer-term growth had
and elsewhere. The possible downshift been marked down. Some participants
in the pace of high-tech spending also believed that the prolonged period of
raised the possibility of an erosion of policy accommodation had generated a
profit margins that could result from a significant degree of liquidity that might
slackening in the pace of technology-led be contributing to signs of potentially
productivity growth and the associated excessive risk-taking in financial mar­
increase in cost pressures. kets evidenced by quite narrow credit
A number of participants voiced con­ spreads, a pickup in initial public offer­
cerns about domestic and global finan­ ings, an upturn in mergers and acquisi­
cial imbalances. On the domestic front, tion activity, and anecdotal reports that
such concerns focused on the magnitude speculative demands were becoming
of current and projected fiscal deficits, apparent in the markets for single-family
which seemed likely to keep national homes and condominiums.
saving low. Views about the prospects Although the November employment
for fiscal restraint in the years ahead report had been disappointing and recent
were mixed; some participants believed readings on initial claims for unem­
that the odds of significant deficit reduc­ ployment insurance had risen, partici­
tion over the next few years were pants viewed labor market conditions
remote while others were more opti­ still as improving gradually. Averaging
mistic. Regarding global imbalances over recent months, or even the entire
and the current account deficit in the year, employment growth had been fast
United States, a number of participants enough to absorb unutilized labor
expressed doubts that such imbal­ resources over time. Anecdotal informa­
ances would be reduced in the near- tion suggested a significant tightening in
term. Better global balance would the market for skilled workers in some
require not only greater national saving industries and regions, although demand
in the United States but also a notable for less skilled workers still appeared
strengthening in domestic demand soft. Recent surveys of hiring plans by
among major trading partners. Such a businesses were read as signaling future
strengthening seemed unlikely in the gains in employment. Despite the fur­
near term given the recent softening ther improvement in labor markets,
in the economies of several important a number of participants noted that
industrial countries. wage and compensation increases had
In their discussion of financial market not picked up materially and generally
conditions, participants noted that inves­ remained moderate.

228 91st Annual Report, 2004
In their discussion of the outlook for tations had been quite stable of late,
prices, a number of participants cited despite the previous rise in energy prices
developments that could pose upside and the lower dollar. Moreover, several
inflation risks. Although oil prices had participants cited factors that likely
fallen of late, they were still consider­ would continue to provide a counter­
ably higher than they had been in the weight to any upside risks. Although
spring, and the recent decline in the participants generally acknowledged
dollar would raise import prices and that the degree of economic slack was
diminish competitive pressures on many quite uncertain, the moderate pace of
industries. The pass-through from both wage and compensation growth in
sources should be limited, but they were recent months in the face of higher
still a potential source of upward pres­ energy prices and several years of rapid
sure on prices that could get embedded productivity growth was consistent with
in higher inflation under certain circum­ an economy still operating somewhat
stances. In addition, productivity growth below its potential. In a similar vein,
had slowed appreciably in the most the recent quarterly dip in productivity
recent quarter and unit labor costs had growth notwithstanding, there were no
increased, raising questions about cost clear signs that underlying productivity
pressures going forward. A few partici­ had slowed appreciably of late, and a
pants also noted that uncertainty about close reading of recent history suggested
the extent of resource slack in the econ­ that upside risks to the outlook for pro­
omy was considerable and that it was ductivity growth could be significant.
quite possible that the economy could Even if structural productivity growth
soon be operating close to potential, par­ were to slow, price markups remained
ticularly if labor force participation rates quite elevated and some participants
did not turn up much while employment noted that further increases in unit labor
continued to register gains. The increase costs could well be absorbed for some
over the last few months in five-year time by a return of markups to more
measures of inflation compensation normal levels.
derived from Treasury nominal and In the Committee’s discussion of pol­
inflation-indexed securities might be a icy for the intermeeting period, all of the
warning sign that expectations were not members (the members of the Board of
as well anchored as they had been over Governors and the five voting Reserve
the summer. Bank Presidents) favored raising the tar­
Despite these concerns, participants get for the federal funds rate by 25 basis
generally expected that inflation would points to 21⁄
4
percent at this meeting. All
remain low in the foreseeable future. members judged that a further quarter-
While the depreciation of the dollar over point tightening in the target federal
recent months had been notable, some funds rate at this meeting was appropri­
participants found persuasive the evi­ ate in light of the prospects for solid
dence from recent studies pointing to a growth and diminished slack. Even with
decline over time and across countries this action, the current level of the
in the pass-through of exchange rate real funds rate target remained below
movements into domestic prices. For­ the level it most likely would need to
ward market-based measures of infla­ reach to keep inflation stable and out­
tion compensation beyond the next five put at its potential. With the economic
years as well as survey measures of both expansion more firmly entrenched,
short- and long-term inflation expec­ cost and price pressures were likely

Minutes of FOMC Meetings, December 229
to become a clearer intermediate-term Account in accordance with the follow­
risk to sustained good economic per­ ing domestic policy directive.
formance absent further reduction of
accommodation. The Federal Open Market Committee
With regard to the Committee’s seeks monetary and financial conditions that
announcement to be released after the will foster price stability and promote sus­
tainable growth in output. To further its long-
meeting, members generally agreed that
run objectives, the Committee in the imme­
overall economic prospects were simi­ diate future seeks conditions in reserve
lar to those prevailing at the time of markets consistent with increasing the fed­
the November meeting and that conse­ eral funds rate to an average of around
quently the statement should be altered 21⁄4 percent.
only to the minor extent required to
The vote encompassed approval of
reflect recent economic developments.
the paragraph below for inclusion in the
They concurred that the statement
statement to be released shortly after the
should note that output appears to be
meeting:
growing at a moderate pace despite the
earlier rise in energy prices, that labor
The Committee perceives the upside and
market conditions continue to improve
downside risks to the attainment of both
gradually, and that inflation and longer-
sustainable growth and price stability for the
term inflation expectations remain well- next few quarters to be roughly equal. With
contained. They also agreed again to underlying inflation expected to be relatively
characterize the risks to sustainable low, the Committee believes that policy
accommodation can be removed at a pace
growth and price stability as balanced.
that is likely to be measured. Nonetheless,
A few members believed that the Com­
the Committee will respond to changes in
mittee’s flexibility would be enhanced economic prospects as needed to fulfill its
by eliminating the forward-looking ele­ obligation to maintain price stability.
ments of the Committee’s statement
referring to the pace of removal of Votes for this action: Messrs. Green-
policy accommodation. More of the span, Geithner, Bernanke, Ms. Bies,
Messrs. Ferguson, Gramlich, Hoenig,
members believed that this language
Kohn, Ms. Minehan, Mr. Olson, Ms. Pian-
was useful in conveying the Commit­
alto, and Mr. Poole. Vote against this
tee’s sense of the outlook for the econ­ action: None.
omy and the stance of monetary pol­
icy and was appropriately conditioned The meeting then turned to consid­
on economic developments. All mem­ eration of releasing FOMC minutes on
bers agreed that the FOMC statement an accelerated schedule. Meeting par­
for this meeting should again indicate ticipants agreed that an experiment with
that policy accommodation could be accelerating the preparation of the min­
removed at a pace that was likely to be utes that had been conducted since early
measured but that the Committee would in the year had been successful in identi­
respond to changes in economic pros­ fying the procedural changes that would
pects as needed to maintain price be necessary if an accelerated schedule
stability. were to be followed going forward. Par­
At the conclusion of the discussion, ticipants noted that the minutes con­
the Committee voted to authorize and tained a more complete and nuanced
direct the Federal Reserve Bank of New explanation of the reasons for the Com­
York, until it was instructed otherwise, mittee’s decisions and view of the risks
to execute transactions in the System to the outlook than was possible in the

230 91st Annual Report, 2004
post-meeting announcement, and their minutes on an expedited schedule, and
earlier release would help markets inter­ the Committee voted unanimously to
pret economic developments and predict begin publishing the minutes of regu­
the course of interest rates. They also larly scheduled meetings three weeks
would provide the public a more up- after the day of the policy decision. The
to-date context for individual policy- minutes of any other Committee meet­
makers’ public remarks. Meeting par­ ings, such as conference calls, would be
ticipants supported the principle of handled somewhat differently. In those
openness and transparency, but debated cases, if a policy action were taken, an
the possibility that the markets would announcement of that action would be
misinterpret the minutes and that the made as soon as practicably possible.
prospect of early release would lead to If, however, no action were taken, the
either less productive discussions at the fact that the conference call took place
meetings or to less comprehensive, and would be reflected in the statement fol­
therefore less useful, minutes. A few lowing the subsequent regular meeting,
participants expressed support for trim­ and, in any case, the minutes of the call
ming the length and forward-looking would be released along with the min­
elements of the post-meeting announce­ utes of the subsequent regular meeting.
ments, should the Committee decide It was agreed that the next meeting
to accelerate release of the minutes. of the Committee would be held on
Others, however, preferred not to link Tuesday–Wednesday, February 1–2,
the two decisions or viewed the more 2005.
extensive announcements as useful The meeting adjourned at 1:25 p.m.
regardless of the minutes’ publication
schedule. Vincent R. Reinhart
The clear consensus of the partici­ Secretary
pants at the meeting was to release the

231
Litigation
During 2004, the Board of Governors Litigation under the Financial
was a party in eight lawsuits or appeals Institutions Supervisory Act
filed that year and was a party in nine
Board of Governors v. Thomas, et al.,
other cases pending from previous
No. 1:04-CV-0777 (N.D. Georgia, filed
years, for a total of seventeen cases; in
March 19, 2004), is an injunctive action
2003, the Board had been a party in a
brought to compel eighteen individuals
total of twelve cases. Two of the law­
named in a separate Board administra­
suits or appeals filed in 2004 raised
tive enforcement proceeding to deposit
questions under the Bank Holding Com­
sufficient funds into the registry of the
pany Act. As of December 31, 2004,
court to satisfy civil money penalties
nine cases were pending.
sought by the Board in the administra­
tive action. On April 2, 2004, the court
issued a temporary restraining order
Judicial Review of Board Orders
granting the relief sought by the Board,
under the Bank Holding
and on April 28, 2004, the court issued a
Company Act
preliminary injunction extending this
Haili et al. v. Greenspan et al., No. 04­ relief until completion of the Board’s
00089 DAE-LEK (D. Hawaii, filed Feb­ enforcement proceeding.
ruary 6, 2004), was an action seeking Ulrich v. Board of Governors, No. 03­
an order requiring the Board to enforce 73854 (9th Circuit, filed October 24,
an alleged commitment made under 2003), and Diehl McCarthy v. Board of
the Community Reinvestment Act. The Governors, No. 03-73997 (9th Circuit,
action also sought a declaratory judg­ filed October 28, 2003), are petitions for
ment and an injunction preventing the review of orders of prohibition issued
approval of an application under the by the Board on October 15, 2003. On
Bank Holding Company Act until the December 12, 2003, the court consoli­
asserted commitment was fulfilled. On dated these cases with related petitions
February 23, 2004, the district court for review of orders issued by the Office
granted the Board’s motion to dismiss of the Comptroller of the Currency
the action. imposing civil money penalties and res­
CB Bancshares, Inc. v. Board of Gov­ titution against the petitioners.
ernors, No. 04-70229 (9th Circuit, filed
January 14, 2004), was a petition for
Other Actions
review of the Board order granting Cen­
tral Pacific Financial Corp. of Honolulu, Inner City Press/Community on the
Hawaii, approval to acquire CB Banc­ Move v. Board of Governors, No. 04­
shares, Inc., also of Honolulu. On CV-8337 (S.D. New York, filed Octo­
June 3, 2004, the court dismissed the ber 21, 2004), is a case brought under
action on the motion of the petitioner. the Freedom of Information Act.

232 91st Annual Report, 2004
Texas State Bank v. United States, bonds. On June 9, 2004, the court
No. 04-5126 (Federal Circuit, filed granted the Board’s motion to dismiss
July 28, 2004), is an appeal of a decision the action.
of the United States Court of Federal Apffel v. Board of Governors, No. 03­
Claims dismissing an action (Commu­ 343 (S.D. Texas, filed May 20, 2003),
nity Bank & Trust v. United States, was a case brought under the Freedom
No. 01-571C, 60 Fed. Cl. 815 (2004)) of Information Act. On January 9, 2004,
challenging on constitutional grounds the court granted the Board’s motion to
the failure to pay interest on reserve dismiss the case.
accounts held at Federal Reserve Banks. Carter v. Greenspan, No. 03-1026
Sciba v. Board of Governors, No. 04­ (D. District of Columbia, filed May 9,
CV-1011 (D. District of Columbia, filed 2003), was an employment discrimina­
June 21, 2004), is a case brought under tion action. On February 19, 2004, the
the Freedom of Information Act. court granted the Board’s motion to dis­
Price v. Greenspan, No. 04-CV-0973 miss the case.
(D. District of Columbia, filed June 14, Albrecht v. Board of Governors,
2004), is an employment discrimination No. 02-5235 (D.C. Circuit, filed Octo­
action. ber 18, 2002), was an appeal of a district
Thomas v. Board of Governors, court order dismissing a challenge to
No. 04-CV-1554 (N.D. Georgia, the pension funding method applicable
removed from Superior Court of Gwin­ to certain Board employees under the
nett County, Georgia, on May 28, 2004), Board’s retirement plan. The district
was an action against the Board, its court’s dismissal was affirmed by the
enforcement staff, and others by indi­ Court of Appeals on February 10, 2004.
viduals involved in a pending enforce­ Artis v. Greenspan, No. 01-0400
ment action. On October 4, 2004, the (D. District of Columbia, filed Febru­
court granted the Board’s motion to dis­ ary 22, 2001), is an employment dis­
miss the action. crimination action. An identical action,
Skanska USA Building, Inc. v. Board No. 99-2073 (EGS) (D. District of
of Governors, No. 304CV00675 SRU Columbia, filed August 3, 1999), was
(D. Connecticut, filed April 22, 2004), consolidated with this action on
was a Freedom of Information Act case. August 15, 2001.
The case was dismissed by stipulation Fraternal Order of Police v. Board of
of the parties on November 29, 2004. Governors, No. 98-3116 (D. District
Laigo v. Board of Governors, No. 03­ of Columbia, filed December 22, 1998),
CV-03576-MJP (W.D. Washington, filed is an action seeking a declaratory judg­
November 19, 2003), was a claim ment regarding the Board’s labor policy
regarding redemption of U.S. savings governing Federal Reserve Banks.

Federal Reserve System
Organization

Federal Reserve System Organization 235
Board of Governors
December 31, 2004
Members
Term expires Office of the Secretary
January 31, Jennifer J. Johnson, Secretary
Alan Greenspan, Chairman1 ........ 2006 Robert deV. Frierson, Deputy Secretary
Roger W. Ferguson, Jr., Margaret M. Shanks, Assistant Secretary
Vice Chairman1 ...................2014
EdwardM.Gramlich .............2008
SusanS.Bies ......................2012 Division of
MarkW.Olson ....................2010 International Finance
Ben S.Bernanke ...................2018 Karen H. Johnson, Director
DonaldL.Kohn ...................2016 David H. Howard, Deputy Director
Thomas A. Connors, Senior Associate
Officers Director
Office of Board Members Dale W. Henderson, Senior Adviser
Richard T. Freeman, Associate Director
Michelle A. Smith, Director
Steven B. Kamin, Associate Director
Winthrop P. Hambley, Assistant to the
Board and Director for Congressional William L. Helkie, Senior Adviser
Liaison Jon W. Faust, Assistant Director
Rosanna Pianalto-Cameron, Special Joseph E. Gagnon, Assistant Director
Assistant to the Board for Public Willene A. Johnson, Adviser
Information
Michael P. Leahy, Assistant Director
David W. Skidmore, Special Assistant
D. Nathan Sheets, Assistant Director
to the Board
Ralph W. Tryon, Assistant Director
Laricke D. Blanchard, Special Assistant to
the Board for Congressional Liaison
Division of Monetary Affairs
Legal Division Vincent R. Reinhart, Director
Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel Brian F. Madigan, Deputy Director
Richard M. Ashton, Associate James A. Clouse, Deputy Associate
General Counsel Director
Stephanie Martin, Associate General William C. Whitesell, Deputy Associate
Counsel Director
Kathleen M. O’Day, Associate General Cheryl L. Edwards, Assistant Director
Counsel William B. English, Assistant Director
Ann Misback, Assistant General Counsel Athanasios Orphanides, Adviser
Katherine H. Wheatley, Assistant General Deborah J. Danker, Special Assistant
Counsel to the Board
Cary K. Williams, Assistant General
Counsel
1. The designations as Chairman and Vice
Chairman expire on June 19, 2008, and Octo­
ber 28, 2007, respectively, unless the service of
these members of the Board shall have terminated
sooner.

236 91st Annual Report, 2004
Board of Governors—Continued
Division of Research Jack P. Jennings, Associate Director
and Statistics Molly S. Wassom, Associate Director
David J. Stockton, Director David M. Wright, Associate Director
Edward C. Ettin, Deputy Director Peter J. Purcell, Associate Director and
Chief Technology Officer
David W. Wilcox, Deputy Director
Howard A. Amer, Deputy Associate
Myron L. Kwast, Associate Director
Director
Stephen D. Oliner, Associate Director
Barbara J. Bouchard, Deputy Associate
Patrick M. Parkinson, Associate Director Director
Lawrence Slifman, Associate Director Angela Desmond, Deputy Associate
Charles S. Struckmeyer, Associate Director Director
David L. Reifschneider, Deputy Associate James A. Embersit, Deputy Associate
Director Director
William L. Wascher III, Deputy Associate Charles H. Holm, Deputy Associate
Director Director
Alice Patricia White, Deputy Associate William G. Spaniel, Deputy Associate
Director Director
Joyce K. Zickler, Deputy Associate Stacy Lee Coleman, Assistant Director
Director Jon D. Greenlee, Assistant Director
Douglas W. Elmendorf, Assistant Director Walt H. Miles, Assistant Director
and Chief
William C. Schneider, Jr., Assistant
Michael S. Gibson, Assistant Director Director
and Chief
William F. Treacy, Assistant Director
Diana Hancock, Assistant Director
and Chief
Division of Consumer
J. Nellie Liang, Assistant Director
and Community Affairs
S. Wayne Passmore, Assistant Director
Janice Shack-Marquez, Assistant Director Sandra F. Braunstein, Director
Daniel E. Sichel, Assistant Director Glenn E. Loney, Deputy Director
Mary M. West, Assistant Director Adrienne D. Hurt, Associate Director
Glenn B. Canner, Senior Adviser Irene Shawn McNulty, Associate Director
David S. Jones, Senior Adviser James A. Michaels, Assistant Director
Thomas D. Simpson, Senior Adviser Tonda E. Price, Assistant Director
Division of Banking Supervision Division of Reserve Bank
and Regulation Operations and Payment
Systems
Richard Spillenkothen, Director
Stephen M. Hoffman, Jr., Deputy Director Louise L. Roseman, Director
Herbert A. Biern, Senior Associate Paul W. Bettge, Associate Director
Director Jeffrey C. Marquardt, Associate Director
Roger T. Cole, Senior Associate Director Kenneth D. Buckley, Assistant Director
Michael G. Martinson, Senior Adviser Joseph H. Hayes, Jr., Assistant Director
Deborah P. Bailey, Associate Director Lisa Hoskins, Assistant Director
Norah M. Barger, Associate Director Dorothy LaChapelle, Assistant Director
Betsy Cross, Associate Director Jeff J. Stehm, Assistant Director
Gerald A. Edwards, Jr., Associate Director Jack K. Walton II, Assistant Director
James V. Houpt, Associate Director

Federal Reserve System Organization 237
Board of Governors—Continued
Office of Staff Director Division of
for Management Information Technology
Stephen R. Malphrus, Staff Director for Marianne M. Emerson, Director
Management Maureen T. Hannan, Deputy Director
Sheila Clark, Equal Employment Tillena G. Clark, Assistant Director
Opportunity Programs Director
Geary L. Cunningham, Assistant Director
Lynn S. Fox, Senior Adviser
Wayne A. Edmondson, Assistant Director
Po Kyung Kim, Assistant Director
Management Division
Susan F. Marycz, Assistant Director
H. Fay Peters, Director Sharon L. Mowry, Assistant Director
Stephen J. Clark, Senior Associate Director Raymond Romero, Assistant Director
Darrell R. Pauley, Deputy Director
Christine M. Fields, Associate Director Office of Inspector General
Marsha W. Reidhill, Associate Director
Barry R. Snyder, Inspector General
Billy J. Sauls, Associate Director
Donald L. Robinson, Deputy Inspector
Donald A. Spicer, Associate Director General
Charles F. O’Malley, Assistant Director Elizabeth A. Coleman, Assistant Inspector
James R. Riesz, Assistant Director General
Laurence A. Froehlich, Assistant Inspector
General
William L. Mitchell, Assistant Inspector
General

238 91st Annual Report, 2004
Federal Open Market Committee
December 31, 2004
Members Officers
Alan Greenspan, Chairman, Board of Vincent R. Reinhart, Secretary and
Governors Economist
Timothy F. Geithner, Vice Chairman, Deborah J. Danker, Deputy Secretary
President, Federal Reserve Bank of Michelle A. Smith, Assistant Secretary
New York Scott G. Alvarez, General Counsel
Ben S. Bernanke, Board of Governors Thomas C. Baxter, Jr., Deputy General
Susan Schmidt Bies, Board of Counsel
Governors Karen H. Johnson, Economist
Roger W. Ferguson, Jr., Board of David J. Stockton, Economist
Governors Thomas A. Connors, Associate Economist
Edward M. Gramlich, Board of Jeffrey C. Fuhrer, Associate Economist
Governors Craig S. Hakkio, Associate Economist
Thomas M. Hoenig, President, Federal David H. Howard, Associate Economist
Reserve Bank of Kansas City Brian F. Madigan, Associate Economist
Donald L. Kohn, Board of Governors Robert H. Rasche, Associate Economist
Cathy E. Minehan, President, Federal Lawrence Slifman, Associate Economist
Reserve Bank of Boston Mark S. Sniderman, Associate Economist
Mark W. Olson, Board of Governors Joseph S. Tracy, Associate Economist
David W. Wilcox, Associate Economist
Sandra Pianalto, President, Federal
Dino Kos, Manager, System Open Market
Reserve Bank of Cleveland
Account
William Poole, President, Federal
Reserve Bank of St. Louis
During 2004 the Federal Open Market Com­
mittee held eight regularly scheduled meet­
Alternate Members
ings (see ‘‘Minutes of Federal Open Market
Christine M. Cumming, First Vice Committee Meetings’’ in this volume).
President, Federal Reserve Bank of
New York
Michael H. Moskow, President,
Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago
Anthony M. Santomero, President,
Federal Reserve Bank of Philadelphia
Gary H. Stern, President, Federal
Reserve Bank of Minneapolis

Federal Reserve System Organization 239
Federal Advisory Council
December 31, 2004
Members District 10—Byron G. Thompson, Chair­
man, Country Club Bank, N.A., Kansas
District 1—William J. Ryan, Chairman, City, Missouri
President, and Chief Executive Officer,
District 11—Gayle M. Earls, President
Banknorth Group, Inc., Portland, Maine
and Chief Executive Officer, TIB—The
District 2—Thomas A. Renyi, Chairman Independent BankersBank, Dallas, Texas
and Chief Executive Officer, The Bank of
District 12—Vacant
New York, New York, New York
District 3—Rufus A. Fulton, Jr., Chair­
man and Chief Executive Officer, Ful­ Officers
ton Financial Corporation, Lancaster,
David W. Kemper, President
Pennsylvania
Vacant, Vice President
District 4 —Martin G. McGuinn, Chair­
man and Chief Executive Officer, Mellon James E. Annable, Secretary
Financial Corp., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
The Federal Advisory Council, which is
District 5—Fred L. Green III, Chairman,
composed of one representative of the bank­
President, and Chief Executive Officer,
ing industry from each of the twelve Federal
The National Bank of South Carolina,
Reserve Districts, is required by the Federal
Columbia, South Carolina
Reserve Act to meet in Washington at least
District 6—Vacant four times each year and is authorized by the
District 7—Dennis J. Kuester, President act to consult with, and advise, the Board
and Chief Executive Officer, Marshall & of Governors on all matters within the juris­
Ilsley Corporation, Milwaukee, Wisconsin diction of the Board. The council met on
District 8—David W. Kemper, Chairman, February 5–6, May 6–7, September 9–10,
President, and Chief Executive Officer, and December 2–3, 2004. The Board met
Commerce Bancshares, Inc., St. Louis, with the council on February 6, May 7, Sep­
Missouri tember 10, and December 3, 2004.
District 9—Jerry A. Grundhofer, Presi­
dent and Chief Executive Officer, U.S.
Bancorp, Minneapolis, Minnesota

240 91st Annual Report, 2004
Consumer Advisory Council
December 31, 2004
Members Debra S. Reyes, President, Neighborhood
Lending Partners, Inc., Tampa, Florida
Dennis L. Algiere, Senior Vice President,
Benson Roberts, Vice President for Policy,
The Washington Trust Company,
Local Initiatives Support Corporation,
Westerly, Rhode Island
Washington, District of Columbia
Janie Barrera, President and Chief Execu­
Benjamin Robinson III, President and
tive Officer, ACCION Texas, San
Chief Executive Officer, Innovative Risks
Antonio, Texas
Solutions, LLC, Charlotte, North Carolina
Kenneth P. Bordelon, Chief Executive
Mary Jane Seebach, Executive Vice
Officer, E Federal Credit Union, Baton
President, Chief Compliance Officer,
Rouge, Louisiana
Countrywide Financial Corporation,
Susan Bredehoft, Senior Vice President/ Calabasas, California
Compliance Risk Management, Com­
Paul J. Springman, Group Executive,
merce Bank, N.A., Cherry Hill, New
Predictive Sciences, Equifax, Atlanta,
Jersey
Georgia
Sheila Canavan, Consumer Attorney, Law
Forrest F. Stanley, Senior Vice President
Office of Sheila Canavan, Moab, Utah
and Deputy General Counsel, KeyBank
Robin Coffey, Vice President, Harris Bank, National Association, Cleveland, Ohio
Chicago, Illinois
Lori R. Swanson, Solicitor General, Office
Ann Diedrick, Senior Vice President, of the Minnesota Attorney General,
JPMorgan Chase Bank, New York, New St. Paul, Minnesota
York
Diane Thompson, Supervising Attorney,
Dan Dixon, Group Senior Vice President, Land of Lincoln Legal Assistance
World Savings Bank, FSB, Washington, Foundation, Inc., East St. Louis, Illinois
District of Columbia
Hubert van Tol, Co-Director, Fairness in
Hattie B. Dorsey, President and Chief Rural Lending, Sparta, Wisconsin
Executive Officer, Atlanta Neighbor­
Clint Walker, General Counsel/Chief
hood Development Partnership, Atlanta,
Administrative Officer, Juniper Bank,
Georgia
Wilmington, Delaware
Thomas Fitzgibbon, Senior Vice President,
MB Financial Bank, Chicago, Illinois
James Garner, Senior Vice President and
General Counsel, North America
Consumer Finance for Citigroup,
Officers
Baltimore, Maryland
Charles Gatson, Vice President, Midtown Agnes Bundy Scanlan, Chair
Community Development Corporation, Senior Vice President,
Kansas City, Missouri Regulatory Relations Executive
Larry Hawkins, President and Chief Bank of America
Executive Officer, Unity National Bank, Boston, Massachusetts
Houston, Texas Mark Pinsky, Vice Chair
W. James King, President and Chief Execu­ President and Chief Executive Officer
tive Officer, Community Redevelopment National Community Capital Association
Group, Cincinnati, Ohio Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Ruhi Maker, Senior Attorney, Law Office
of Rochester, Rochester, New York The Consumer Advisory Council is com­
posed of academics, state and local gov­
Patricia McCoy, Professor of Law,
ernment officials, representatives of the
University of Connecticut School of Law,
financial industry, and representatives of
Hartford, Connecticut
consumer and community interests. It was
Elsie Meeks, Executive Director, First established pursuant to the 1976 amend­
Nations Oweesta Corporation, Rapid City, ments to the Equal Credit Opportunity Act
South Dakota to advise the Board of Governors on con­
Bruce B. Morgan, Chairman, President, sumer financial services. The council met
and Chief Executive Officer, Valley State with members of the Board on March 25,
Bank, Roeland Park, Kansas June 24, and October 28, 2004.

Federal Reserve System Organization 241
Thrift Institutions Advisory Council
December 31, 2004
Members George W. Nise, President and Chief
Executive Officer, Beneficial Savings
Eldon R. Arnold, President and Chief Bank, Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Executive Officer, Citizens Equity First
William J. Small, Chairman and Chief
Credit Union (CEFCU), Peoria, Illinois
Executive Officer, First Federal Bank,
H. Brent Beesley, Chairman and Chief Defiance, Ohio
Executive Officer, Heritage Bank,
Roy M. Whitehead, President and Chief
St. George, Utah
Executive Officer, Washington Federal
Michael J. Brown, Sr., President and Savings, Seattle, Washington
Chief Executive Officer, Harbor Federal
Savings Bank, Fort Pierce, Florida
Richard J. Driscoll, Chief Executive Offi­ Officers
cer, First Savings Bank, FSB, Arlington,
Texas William J. Small, President
Douglas K. Freeman, Chairman and Chief D. Tad Lowrey, Vice President
Executive Officer, NetBank, Alpharetta,
Georgia The Thrift Institutions Advisory Council,
Curtis L. Hage, Chairman and Chief which is composed of representatives from
Executive Officer, Home Federal Bank, credit unions, savings and loan associations,
Sioux Falls, South Dakota and savings banks, consults with, and ad­
vises, the Board of Governors on issues per­
David H. Hancock, Chief Executive Offi­
taining to the thrift industry and on various
cer, North American Savings Bank,
other matters within the Board’s jurisdiction.
Grandview, Missouri
The members of the council met with the
Olan O. Jones, Jr., President and Chief Board on March 5, July 9, and December 10,
Executive Officer, Eastman Credit Union, 2004.
Kingsport, Tennessee
D. Tad Lowrey, Chairman, President, and
Chief Executive Officer, Jackson Federal
Bank, Brea, California

242 91st Annual Report, 2004
Federal Reserve Banks and Branches
December 31, 2004
Officers
Chairman1 President Vice President
BANK or Branch
Deputy Chairman First Vice President in charge of Branch
BOSTON 2 .............. Samuel O. Thier Cathy E. Minehan
Blenda J. Wilson Paul M. Connolly
NEW YORK 2 ........... John E. Sexton Timothy F. Geithner
Jerry I. Speyer Christine M.
Cumming
Buffalo .................. Marguerite D. Barbara L. Walter 3
Hambleton
PHILADELPHIA ....... Ronald J. Naples Anthony M. Santomero
Doris M. Damm William H. Stone, Jr.
CLEVELAND2 ......... Robert W. Mahoney Sandra Pianalto
Charles E. Bunch Robert Christy Moore
Cincinnati ............... Dennis C. Cuneo Barbara B. Henshaw
Pittsburgh ............... Roy W. Haley Robert B. Schaub
RICHMOND2 .......... Wesley S. Williams, Jr. Jeffrey M. Lacker
Thomas J. Walter A. Varvel
Mackell, Jr.
Baltimore ............... Owen E. Herrnstadt David Beck 4
Charlotte ................ Michael A. Almond Jeffrey S. Kane 3
ATLANTA............... David M. Ratcliffe Jack Guynn James M. McKee 3
V. Larkin Martin Patrick K. Barron
Birmingham ............. Catherine Crenshaw Lee C. Jones
Jacksonville.............. Julie Hilton Christopher L. Oakley
Miami.................... Rosa Sugranes Juan del Busto
Nashville................. Rodney Lawler Melvyn K. Purcell 3
New Orleans............. Dave Dennis Robert J. Musso 3
CHICAGO 2 ............. W. James Farrell Michael H. Moskow
Miles D. White Gordon R.G.
Werkema
Detroit ................... Edsel B. Ford II Glenn Hansen 3
ST. LOUIS............... Walter L. Metcalfe, Jr. William Poole
Gayle P. W. Jackson W. LeGrande Rives
Little Rock............... Scott T. Ford Robert A. Hopkins 5
Louisville ................ Cornelius A. Martin Thomas A. Boone 5
Memphis................. Meredith B. Allen Martha Perine Beard 5
MINNEAPOLIS......... Linda Hall Whitman Gary H. Stern
Frank L. Sims James M. Lyon
Helena ................... Dean Folkvord Samuel H. Gane

Federal Reserve System Organization 243
Officers—Continued
Chairman1 President Vice President
BANK or Branch
Deputy Chairman First Vice President in charge of Branch
KANSAS CITY ......... Richard H. Bard Thomas M. Hoenig
Robert A. Funk Richard K. Rasdall
Denver................... Thomas Williams Pamela L. Weinstein
Oklahoma City .......... Tyree O. Minner Dwayne E. Boggs
Omaha ................... A.F. Raimondo Kevin A. Drusch
DALLAS ................ Ray L. Hunt
Patricia M. Helen E. Holcomb 6
Patterson
El Paso................... Ron C. Helm Robert W. Gilmer 4
Houston.................. Lupe Fraga Robert Smith III 3
San Antonio ............. Ron R. Harris D. Karen Diaz 8
SAN FRANCISCO...... George M. Scalise Janet L. Yellen
Sheila D. Harris John F. Moore
Los Angeles ............. William D. Jones Mark L. Mullinix 7
Portland.................. Karla S. Chambers Richardson B.
Hornsby
Salt Lake City ........... H. Roger Boyer Andrea P. Wolcott
Seattle.................... Mic R. Dinsmore Mark Gould 3
Note. A current list of these officers appears each 3. Senior vice president.
quarter in the Federal Reserve Bulletin. 4. Acting vice president.
1. The chairman of a Federal Reserve Bank serves, by 5. Senior branch executive.
statute, as Federal Reserve agent. 6. Served as acting president as of November 5, 2004,
2. Additional offices of these Banks are located at following the resignation of President Robert D.
Windsor Locks, Connecticut; Utica at Oriskany, New McTeer, Jr.
York; East Rutherford, New Jersey; Columbus, Ohio; 7. Executive vice president.
Des Moines, Iowa; Midway at Bedford Park, Illinois, and 8. Acting assistant vice president.
Phoenix, Arizona.
Conference of Chairmen Conference of Presidents
The chairmen of the Federal Reserve Banks The presidents of the Federal Reserve
are organized into the Conference of Chair­ Banks are organized into the Conference
men, which meets to consider matters of of Presidents, which meets periodically to
common interest and to consult with and consider matters of common interest and
advise the Board of Governors. Such meet­ to consult with and advise the Board of
ings, attended also by the deputy chairmen, Governors.
were held in Washington on June 2 and 3, Michael H. Moskow, president of the
and on December 1 and 2, 2004. Federal Reserve Bank of Chicago, served
The members of the executive com­ as chair of the conference in 2004, and
mittee of the Conference of Chairmen dur­ Cathy E. Minehan, president of the Federal
ing 2004 were Wesley S. Williams, Jr., chair; Reserve Bank of Boston, served as its vice
George M. Scalise, vice chair; and Walter L. chair. Valerie J. Van Meter, of the Federal
Metcalfe, Jr., member. Reserve Bank of Chicago, served as its sec­
On December 2, 2004, the conference retary, and Michael P. Malone, of the Federal
elected its executive committee for 2005, Reserve Bank of Boston, served as its assis­
naming George M. Scalise as chair; tant secretary.
Walter L. Metcalfe, Jr., as vice chair; and On October 27, 2004, the conference
John E. Sexton as the third member. elected Cathy E. Minehan as its chair for

244 91st Annual Report, 2004
2005–06 and Anthony M. Santomero, presi­ not exclusive, consideration to the interests
dent of the Federal Reserve Bank of Phila­ of agriculture, commerce, industry, services,
delphia, as its vice chair. labor, and consumers; they may not be offi­
cers, directors, or employees of any bank or
bank holding company. In addition, Class C
Conference of First directors may not be stockholders of any
Vice Presidents bank or bank holding company.
For the election of Class A and Class B
The Conference of First Vice Presidents of
directors, the member banks of each Fed­
the Federal Reserve Banks was organized in
eral Reserve District are classified into
1969 to meet periodically for the consider­
three groups. Each group, which comprises
ation of operations and other matters.
banks with similar capitalization, elects one
Walter A. Varvel, first vice president of
Class A director and one Class B director.
the Federal Reserve Bank of Richmond,
Annually, the Board of Governors designates
served as chair of the conference in 2004,
one of the Class C directors as chair of
and Helen E. Holcomb, first vice president
the board and Federal Reserve agent of
of the Federal Reserve Bank of Dallas,
each District Bank, and it designates another
served as its vice chair. Janice E. Clatter-
Class C director as deputy chair.
buck, of the Federal Reserve Bank of Rich­
Federal Reserve Branches have either five
mond, served as its secretary, and Harvey R.
or seven directors, a majority of whom are
Mitchell, of the Federal Reserve Bank of
appointed by the parent Federal Reserve
Dallas, served as its assistant secretary.
Bank; the others are appointed by the Board
of Governors. One of the directors appointed
Directors by the Board is designated annually as chair
of the board of that Branch in a manner
Each Federal Reserve Bank has a nine- prescribed by the parent Federal Reserve
member board: three Class A and three Bank.
Class B directors, who are elected by the The chairs and deputy chairs of the
stockholding member banks, and three Reserve Bank boards of directors, and the
Class C directors, who are appointed by the chairs of the Branches, are listed in the pre­
Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve ceding table, titled ‘‘Officers.’’ The directors
System. of the Banks and Branches are listed in the
Class A directors represent the stockhold­ following table. For each director, the class
ing member banks in each Federal Reserve of directorship, the director’s principal orga­
District. Class B and Class C directors repre­ nizational affiliation, and the date the direc­
sent the public and are chosen with due, but tor’s term expires is shown.

Federal Reserve System Organization 245
Directors
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
DISTRICT 1—BOSTON
Reserve Bank
Class A
Lawrence K. Fish ........... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Citizens Financial Group, Inc.,
Providence, Rhode Island
James R. Wood ............. President, First National Bank of Suffield, 2005
Suffield, Connecticut
Peter A. Blyberg ............ President and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Union Trust Company, Ellsworth, Maine
Class B
Robert K. Kraft ............. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
The Kraft Group, Foxborough, Massachusetts
Orit Gadiesh ................ Chairman, Bain & Company, Inc., Boston, Massachusetts 2005
Kirk P. Pond ................ President, Chief Executive Officer, and Chairman, 2006
Fairchild Semiconductor International,
South Portland, Maine
Class C
Samuel O. Thier ............ Professor of Medicine and Health Care Policy, 2004
Harvard Medical School, Massachusetts
General Hospital, Boston, Massachusetts
Blenda J. Wilson ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, Nellie Mae 2005
Education Foundation, Quincy, Massachusetts
Lisa M. Lynch .............. William L. Clayton Professor of International Affairs, 2006
The Fletcher School of Law and Diplomacy,
Medford, Massachusetts
DISTRICT 2—NEW YORK
Reserve Bank
Class A
Jill M. Considine ........... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The Depository 2004
Trust Company, New York, New York
Charles V. Wait ............. President, Chief Executive Officer, and Chairman, 2005
The Adirondack Trust Company,
Saratoga Springs, New York
Sanford I. Weill ............. Chairman, Citigroup Inc., New York, New York 2006
Class B
Ronay Menschel ............ Chairman, Phipps Houses, New York, New York 2004
Marta Tienda ............... Maurice P. During Professor of Demographic Studies, 2005
Princeton University, Princeton, New Jersey
Denis M. Hughes ........... President, New York State AFL-CIO, 2006
New York, New York
Class C
John E. Sexton .............. President, New York University, New York, New York 2004
Loretta E. Lynch ............ Partner, Hogan & Hartson LLC, New York, New York 2005
Jerry I. Speyer .............. President and Chief Executive Officer, Tishman Speyer 2006
Properties, New York, New York

246 91st Annual Report, 2004
Directors—Continued
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Buffalo Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Emerson L. Brumback ..... President and Chief Operating Officer, Manufacturers 2004
and Traders Trust Company, Buffalo, New York
Geraldine C. Ochocinska . . . Regional Director, Region 9, UAW, Amherst, New York 2005
Maureen Torrey Marshall . . Vice President, Torrey Farms, Inc., Elba, New York 2006
Peter G. Humphrey ......... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Financial Institutions, Inc., Warsaw, New York
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Marguerite D. Hambleton . . President and Chief Executive Officer, AAA Western 2004
and Central New York, Williamsville, New York
Brian J. Lipke ............... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Gibraltar, 2005
Buffalo, New York
Alphonso O’Neil-White .... President and Chief Executive Officer, HealthNow 2006
New York, Inc., Buffalo, New York
DISTRICT 3—PHILADELPHIA
Reserve Bank
Class A
Walter E. Daller, Jr. ......... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Harleysville National Corporation,
Harleysville, Pennsylvania
Kenneth R. Shoemaker ..... President and Chief Executive Officer, Orrstown Bank, 2005
Shippensburg, Pennsylvania
Eugene W. Rogers .......... Chief Executive Officer, Newfield National Bank, 2006
Newfield, New Jersey
Class B
P. Coleman Townsend, Jr. . . Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Townsends, Inc., 2004
Wilmington, Delaware
Robert E. Chappell ......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Penn Mutual 2005
Life Insurance Co., Horsham, Pennsylvania
Garry L. Maddox ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
A. Pomerantz & Company,
Philadelphia, Pennsylvania
Class C
Doris M. Damm ............ President and Chief Executive Officer, ACCU Staffing 2004
Services, Cherry Hill, New Jersey
Ronald J. Naples ............ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Quaker 2005
Chemical Corporation, Conshohocken, Pennsylvania
William F. Hecht ........... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
PPL Corporation, Allentown, Pennsylvania

Federal Reserve System Organization 247
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
DISTRICT 4—CLEVELAND
Reserve Bank
Class A
John R. Cochran ............ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
FirstMerit Corporation, Akron, Ohio
Bick Weissenrieder ......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Hocking Valley Bank, Athens, Ohio
Stephen P. Wilson .......... President and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Lebanon Citizens National Bank, Lebanon, Ohio
Class B
Wayne R. Embry ........... Former President and Chief Operating Officer, 2004
Cleveland Cavaliers, Cleveland, Ohio
Tanny Crane ................ President and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Crane Group Company, Columbus, Ohio
V. Ann Hailey .............. Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, 2006
Limited Brands, Columbus, Ohio
Class C
Charles E. Bunch ........... President and Chief Operating Officer, 2004
PPG Industries, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Phillip R. Cox .............. President and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Cox Financial Corporation, Cincinnati, Ohio
Robert W. Mahoney ........ Retired Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Diebold, Incorporated, Canton, Ohio
Cincinnati Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
James H. Booth ............. President, Czar Coal Corporation, Lovely, Kentucky 2004
V. Daniel Radford .......... Executive Secretary-Treasurer, Cincinnati AFL-CIO 2005
Labor Council, Cincinnati, Ohio
Glenn D. Leveridge ........ President, Bank One, NA, Lexington, Kentucky 2005
Charlotte W. Martin ........ President and Chief Executive Officer, Great Lakes 2006
Bankers Bank, Gahanna, Ohio
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Herbert R. Brown ........... Senior Vice President, Western and Southern Financial 2004
Group, Cincinnati, Ohio
Dennis C. Cuneo ........... Senior Vice President, Toyota Motor North America, 2005
Inc., New York, New York
Charles Whitehead ......... Retired President, Ashland Inc. Foundation, 2006
Villa Hills, Kentucky
Pittsburgh Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Michael J. Hagan ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Iron and Glass Bank, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Ronnie L. Bryant ........... President and Chief Operating Officer, CEcD, 2005
Pittsburgh Regional Alliance,
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania

248 91st Annual Report, 2004
Directors—Continued
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Georgiana N. Riley ......... President and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
TIGG Corporation, Bridgeville, Pennsylvania
Kristine N. Molnar ......... Executive Vice President, WesBanco Bank, Inc., 2006
Wheeling, West Virginia
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Robert O. Agbede .......... President and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
ATS-Chester Engineers, Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
Roy W. Haley ............... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
WESCO International, Inc., Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
James I. Mitnick ............ Senior Vice President, Turner Construction Company, 2006
Pittsburgh, Pennsylvania
DISTRICT 5—RICHMOND
Reserve Bank
Class A
Eddie Canterbury ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, Logan Bank & 2004
Trust Company, Logan, West Virginia
Barry J. Fitzpatrick ......... Chairman, Branch Banking & Trust Co. of Virginia, 2005
Falls Church, Virginia
Ernest J. Sewell ............. President and Chief Executive Officer, FNB Southeast, 2006
Greensboro, North Carolina
Class B
Joe Edens ................... Chairman, Edens & Avant, Columbia, South Carolina 2004
W. Henry Harmon .......... President and Chief Executive Officer, Columbia 2005
Natural Resources, LLC, Charleston, West Virginia
Kenneth R. Sparks .......... President and Chief Executive Officer, Ken Sparks 2006
Associates LLC, White Stone, Virginia
Class C
Theresa M. Stone ........... Chief Financial Officer, Jefferson-Pilot Corporation, 2004
President, Jefferson-Pilot Communications Company,
Greensboro, North Carolina
Thomas J. Mackell, Jr. ...... President and Chief Operating Officer, 2005
The Kamber Group, Washington, D.C.
Wesley S. Williams, Jr. ..... Partner, Covington & Burling, Washington, D.C. 2006
Baltimore Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Donald P. Hutchinson ...... President and Chief Executive Officer, SunTrust Bank, 2004
Maryland, Baltimore, Maryland
Dyan Brasington ............ President (Retired), Technology Council of Maryland, 2005
Rockville, Maryland
Kenneth C. Lundeen ........ President, C.J. Langenfelder & Son, Inc., 2006
Baltimore, Maryland

Federal Reserve System Organization 249
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Michael L. Middleton ...... Chairman and President, Community Bank of 2006
Tri-County, Waldorf, Maryland
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Owen E. Herrnstadt ........ Director, International Department, International 2004
Association of Machinists and Aerospace Workers,
AFL-CIO, Upper Marlboro, Maryland
Cynthia Collins Allner ..... Principal, Miles & Stockbridge PC, 2005
Baltimore, Maryland
William C. Handorf ........ Professor of Finance, George Washington University, 2006
Washington, D.C.
Charlotte Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
William H. Nock ........... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Wayfarer 2004
Financial Group, Sumter, South Carolina
Lucy J. Reuben ............. Durham, North Carolina 2005
Michael C. Miller ........... Chairman and President, FNB Corp. and First National 2006
Bank and Trust Company, Asheboro, North Carolina
Donald K. Truslow ......... Chief Risk Officer, Wachovia Corporation, 2006
Charlotte, North Carolina
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
James F. Goodmon ......... President and Chief Executive Officer, Capitol 2004
Broadcasting Company, Inc., Raleigh, North Carolina
Michael A. Almond ........ President and Chief Executive Officer, Charlotte 2005
Regional Partnership, Charlotte, North Carolina
Jim Lowry .................. Dealer Operator, Crown Automotive, 2006
High Point, North Carolina
DISTRICT 6—ATLANTA
Reserve Bank
Class A
James F. Beall .............. Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Farmers & Merchants Bank, Centre, Alabama
Richard G. Hickson ........ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Trustmark 2005
Corporation, Jackson, Mississippi
William G. Smith, Jr. ....... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Capital City Bank Group, Inc., Tallahassee, Florida
Class B
Suzanne E. Boas ............ President, Consumer Credit Counseling Service of 2004
Greater Atlanta, Inc., Atlanta, Georgia

250 91st Annual Report, 2004
Directors—Continued
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Egbert L.J. Perry ........... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
The Integral Group, LLC, Atlanta, Georgia
Teri G. Fontenot ............ President and Chief Executive Officer, Woman’s 2006
Hospital, Baton Rouge, Louisiana
Class C
David M. Ratcliffe .......... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Southern Company, Atlanta, Georgia
V. Larkin Martin ............ Managing Partner, Martin Farm, Courtland, Alabama 2005
D. Scott Davis .............. Chief Financial Officer, United Parcel Service, 2006
Atlanta, Georgia
Birmingham Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
John B. Barnett III .......... Monroeville President and Chairman, BankTrust, 2004
Monroeville, Alabama
John H. Holcomb III ....... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Alabama 2005
National Bancorporation, Birmingham, Alabama
Samuel F. Dodson .......... Business Manager, International Union of Operating 2006
Engineers-Local 312, Birmingham, Alabama
Bobby A. Bradley .......... Retired Senior Vice President and Group Manager, 2006
Science Applications International Corporation,
Huntsville, Alabama
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Catherine Sloss Crenshaw .. President, Sloss Real Estate Group, Inc., 2004
Birmingham, Alabama
James H. Sanford ........... Chairman of the Board, HOME Place Farms, Inc., 2005
Prattville, Alabama
W. Miller Welborn .......... President, Welborn and Associates, Inc., 2006
Lookout Mountain, Tennessee
Jacksonville Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Harvey R. Heller ........... President, Heller Brothers Packing Corporation, 2004
Winter Garden, Florida
Jerry M. Smith .............. Chairman and President, First National Bank 2005
of Alachua, Alachua, Florida
Robert L. Fisher ............ President and Chief Executive Officer, MacDill 2006
Federal Credit Union, Tampa, Florida
Ellen S. Titen ............... President, E.T. Consultants, Winter Park, Florida 2006
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Julie K. Hilton .............. Vice President and Co-Owner, Paradise Found Resorts 2004
& Hotels, Panama City Beach, Florida
Fassil Gabremariam ........ President and Founder, U.S.-Africa Free Enterprise 2005
Education Foundation, Tampa, Florida
Linda H. Sherrer ............ President and Chief Executive Officer, Prudential 2006
Network Realty, Jacksonville, Florida

Federal Reserve System Organization 251
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Miami Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Rudy Everett Schupp ....... President and Chief Executive Officer, First United 2004
Bank, North Palm Beach, Florida
Francis V. Gudorf ........... President and Executive Director, Jubilee Community 2005
Development Corporation, Miami, Florida
Joseph C. Schwartzel ....... President, Meridian Broadcasting, Inc., 2005
Fort Myers, Florida
Miriam Lopez .............. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
TransAtlantic Bank, Miami, Florida
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Rosa Sugranes .............. Chairman, Iberia Tiles Corp, Miami, Florida 2004
Edwin A. Jones, Jr. ......... President, Angus Investments, Inc., 2005
Port St. Lucie, Florida
Brian E. Keeley ............. President and Chief Executive Officer, Baptist Health 2006
South Florida, Coral Gables, Florida
Nashville Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Sam O. Franklin III ......... Retired Chairman, SunTrust Bank, Nashville, 2004
Nashville, Tennessee
Michael B. Swain ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, First National 2005
Bank, Oneida, Tennessee
James W. Spradley, Jr. ...... President and Chief Executive Officer, Standard 2006
Candy Company, Inc., Nashville, Tennessee
Daniel A. Gaudette ......... Senior Vice President, North American Manufacturing 2006
and Quality Assurance, Nissan North America, Inc.,
Smyrna, Tennessee
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
F. Rodney Lawler ........... Co-Founder and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Lawler-Wood, LLC, Knoxville, Tennessee
Beth Dortch Franklin ....... Chief Executive Officer, Star Transportation, Inc., 2005
Nashville, Tennessee
David Williams II .......... Vice Chancellor and General Counsel, Vanderbilt 2006
University, Nashville, Tennessee
New Orleans Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
David E. Johnson ........... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The First 2004
Bancshares, Inc., and The First, A National Banking
Association, Hattiesburg, Mississippi
C. R. Cloutier ............... President and Chief Executive Officer, MidSouth Bank, 2005
Lafayette, Louisiana
Lawrence E. Kurzius ....... President and Chief Executive Officer, Zatarain’s, 2006
Gretna, Louisiana
Christel C. Slaughter ....... Partner, General Business, SSA Consultants, LLC, 2006
Baton Rouge, Louisiana

252 91st Annual Report, 2004
Directors—Continued
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Dave Dennis ................ President, Specialty Contractors & Assoc., Inc., 2004
Gulfport, Mississippi
Earl L. Shipp ............... Vice President and Site Director, The Dow Chemical 2005
Company, Louisiana Operations,
Plaquemine, Louisiana
Ben Tom Roberts ........... Senior Executive Vice President/Owner, Roberts 2006
Brothers, Inc., Realtors, Mobile, Alabama
DISTRICT 7—CHICAGO
Reserve Bank
Class A
Alan R. Tubbs .............. President, Maquoketa State Bank and Ohnward 2004
Bancshares Inc., Maquoketa, Iowa
William A. Osborn ......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Northern Trust 2005
Corporation and The Northern Trust
Company, Chicago, Illinois
Michael L. Kubacki ........ Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Lakeland Financial Corporation, Warsaw, Indiana
Class B
James H. Keyes ............. Chairman of the Board-Retired, Johnson Controls, Inc., 2004
Milwaukee, Wisconsin
Connie E. Evans ............ President and Chief Executive Officer, WSEP Ventures, 2005
Chicago, Illinois
Mark T. Gaffney ............ President, Michigan AFL-CIO, Lansing, Michigan 2006
Class C
Miles D. White ............. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Abbott 2004
Laboratories, Abbott Park, Illinois
John A. Canning, Jr. ........ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Madison 2005
Dearborn Partners, Inc., Chicago, Illinois
W. James Farrell ............ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Illinois Tool 2006
Works, Inc., Glenview, Illinois
Detroit Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Robert E. Churchill ......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Citizens 2004
National Bank, Cheboygan, Michigan
Tommi A. White ............ Chief Operating Officer, Compuware Corporation, 2005
Detroit, Michigan
Linda S. Likely ............. Executive Director, Kalamazoo Neighborhood 2005
Housing Services, Kalamazoo, Michigan
Ralph W. Babb, Jr. .......... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Comerica Incorporated, Detroit, Michigan
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Irvin D. Reid ................ President, Wayne State University, Detroit, Michigan 2004
Edsel B. Ford II ............ Board Director, Ford Motor Company, 2005
Dearborn, Michigan
Roger A. Cregg ............. Executive Vice President and Chief Financial Officer, 2006
Pulte Homes, Inc., Bloomfield Hills, Michigan

Federal Reserve System Organization 253
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
DISTRICT 8—ST. LOUIS
Reserve Bank
Class A
Lewis F. Mallory, Jr. ........ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, National Bank 2004
of Commerce, Starkville, Mississippi
Lunsford W. Bridges ....... President and Chief Executive Officer, Metropolitan 2005
National Bank, Little Rock, Arkansas
Bradley W. Small ........... Principal, Mathis, Marifian, Richter & Grandy, Ltd., 2006
Belleville, Illinois
Class B
Bert Greenwalt ............. Partner, Greenwalt Company, Hazen, Arkansas 2004
J. Stephen Barger ........... Taft-Hartley Coordinator, Indiana/Kentucky Regional 2005
Council of Carpenters, Louisville, Kentucky
A. Rogers Yarnell II ........ President, Yarnell Ice Cream Co., Inc., Searcy, Arkansas 2006
Class C
Charles W. Mueller ......... Retired Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Ameren Corporation, St. Louis, Missouri
Gayle P.W. Jackson ......... Managing Director, FondElec Clean Energy Group, Inc., 2005
St. Louis, Missouri
Walter L. Metcalfe, Jr. ...... Partner, Bryan Cave LLP, St. Louis, Missouri 2006
Little Rock Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Lawrence A. Davis, Jr. ..... Chancellor, University of Arkansas at Pine Bluff, 2004
Pine Bluff, Arkansas
David R. Estes .............. President and Chief Executive Officer, First State Bank, 2005
Lonoke, Arkansas
Robert A. Young III ........ Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Arkansas Best Corporation, Fort Smith, Arkansas
Raymond E. Skelton ........ Little Rock, Arkansas 2006
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Sonja Yates Hubbard ....... Chief Executive Officer, E-Z Mart Stores, Inc., 2004
Texarkana, Texas
Stephen M. Erixon ......... Chief Executive Officer, Baxter Regional Medical 2005
Center, Mountain Home, Arkansas
Scott T. Ford ................ President and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
ALLTEL Corporation, Little Rock, Arkansas
Louisville Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
David H. Brooks ............ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Stock Yards 2004
Bank & Trust Company, Louisville, Kentucky
Marjorie Z. Soyugenc ...... Executive Director and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Welborn Foundation, Evansville, Indiana

254 91st Annual Report, 2004
Directors—Continued
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
L. Clark Taylor, Jr. .......... Chief Executive Officer, Ephraim McDowell Health, 2005
Danville, Kentucky
Gordon B. Guess ........... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
The Peoples Bank, Marion, Kentucky
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Cornelius A. Martin ........ President and Chief Executive Officer, Martin 2004
Management Group, Bowling Green, Kentucky
Maria Gerwing Hampton . . . President, The Housing Partnership, Inc., 2005
Louisville, Kentucky
Norman E. Pfau, Jr. ......... President and Chief Executive Officer, Geo. Pfau’s Sons 2006
Company, Inc., Jeffersonville, Indiana
Memphis Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Walter L. Morris, Jr. ........ President, H&M Lumber Co., Inc., 2004
West Helena, Arkansas
James A. England .......... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Decatur County Bank, Decaturville, Tennessee
Tom A. Wright ............. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Enterprise 2005
National Bank, Memphis, Tennessee
David P. Rumbarger, Jr. .... President and Chief Executive Officer, Community 2006
Development Foundation, Tupelo, Mississippi
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Gregory M. Duckett ........ Senior Vice President and Corporate Counsel, 2004
Baptist Memorial Health Care Corporation,
Memphis, Tennessee
Meredith Baird Allen ....... Vice President, Marketing, Staple Cotton Cooperative 2005
Association, Greenwood, Mississippi
Russell Gwatney ............ President, Gwatney Companies, Memphis, Tennessee 2006
DISTRICT 9—MINNEAPOLIS
Reserve Bank
Class A
Kay Clevidence ............. President, Farmers State Bank, Victor, Montana 2004
Robert Dickson ............. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The First 2005
National Bank of Fairfax, Fairfax, Minnesota
Douglas C. Morrison ....... Chief Financial Officer, Citibank (South Dakota) N.A., 2006
Sioux Falls, South Dakota
Class B
Jay F. Hoeschler ............ President and Owner, Hoeschler Corporation, 2004
La Crosse, Wisconsin
Randy Peterson ............. General Manager, Precision Edge Surgical 2005
Products Co., LLC, Sault Ste. Marie, Michigan

Federal Reserve System Organization 255
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
D. Greg Heineman ......... Chairman, Williams Insurance Agency, 2006
Sioux Falls, South Dakota
Class C
Frank L. Sims ............... Corporate Vice President, Transportation, Cargill, Inc., 2004
Minnetonka, Minnesota
Linda Hall Whitman ........ Chief Executive Officer, MinuteClinic, 2005
Minneapolis, Minnesota
James J. Hynes ............. Executive Administrator, Twin City Pipe Trades Service 2006
Association, St. Paul, Minnesota
Helena Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Marilyn F. Wessel .......... Former Dean and Director, Museum of the Rockies, 2004
Bozeman, Montana
Joy N. Ott ................... Regional President and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Wells Fargo Bank Montana, N.A., Billings, Montana
Ronald D. Scott ............. President and Chief Executive Officer, The First State 2005
Bank of Malta, Malta, Montana
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Dean Folkvord .............. President and Chief Executive Officer, Wheat Montana 2004
Farms and Bakery, Three Forks, Montana
Lawrence R. Simkins ....... President, Washington Corporations, Missoula, Montana 2005
DISTRICT 10—KANSAS CITY
Reserve Bank
Class A
Jeffrey L. Gerhart ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, First National 2004
Bank of Newman Grove, Newman Grove, Nebraska
Rick L. Smalley ............ Chief Executive Officer, Dickinson Financial 2005
Corporation, Kansas City, Missouri
Mark W. Schifferdecker .... President and Chief Executive Officer, Girard National 2006
Bank, Girard, Kansas
Class B
Frank Moore ................ President, Spearhead Ranch Company, 2004
Douglas, Wyoming
Dan L. Dillingham ......... Chief Executive Officer, Dillingham Insurance, 2005
Enid, Oklahoma
Kevin K. Nunnink .......... Chairman, Integra Realty Resources, Westwood, Kansas 2006
Class C
Richard H. Bard ............ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, International 2004
Surface Preparation Corporation, Golden, Colorado

256 91st Annual Report, 2004
Directors—Continued
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Vacancy ..................... 2005
Robert A. Funk ............. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Express Personnel Services International,
Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Denver Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Michael R. Stanford ........ President and Chief Executive Officer, First State 2004
Bancorporation, Albuquerque, New Mexico
Virginia K. Berkeley ....... President, CoBiz Bank, N.A., Denver, Colorado 2005
James A. Helzer ............ President and Chief Executive Officer, Unicover 2006
Corporation, Cheyenne, Wyoming
Kristy A. Schloss ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, Schloss 2006
Engineered Equipment, Inc., Aurora, Colorado
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
James A. King .............. Chief Executive Officer, BT, Inc., Riverton, Wyoming 2004
Kathleen Avila .............. Managing Member, Avila Retail Development & 2005
Management, Albuquerque, New Mexico
Thomas Williams ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, Williams 2006
Group LLC, Golden, Colorado
Oklahoma City Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
W. Carlisle Mabrey III ..... President and Chief Executive Officer, Citizens 2004
Bank & Trust Co., Okmulgee, Oklahoma
Robert R. Gilbert III ........ President and Chief Operating Officer, 2004
The F&M Bank & Trust Company, Tulsa, Oklahoma
Fred M. Ramos ............. President, Greater Tulsa Hispanic Chamber 2005
of Commerce, Tulsa, Oklahoma
Richard K. Ratcliffe ........ Chairman, Ratcliffe’s Inc., Weatherford, Oklahoma 2006
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
J. Larry Nichols ............ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Devon Energy 2004
Corporation, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Michael J. Packnett ......... President and Chief Executive Officer, Mercy Health 2005
System of Oklahoma, Inc., Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Tyree O. Minner ............ Plant Manager, Oklahoma City Assembly, 2006
General Motors, Oklahoma City, Oklahoma
Omaha Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Cynthia Hardin Milligan ... Dean, College of Business Administration, 2004
University of Nebraska-Lincoln, Lincoln, Nebraska
Judith A. Owen ............. Retired President and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Wells Fargo Bank, N.A., Omaha, Nebraska

Federal Reserve System Organization 257
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Rodrigo Lopez .............. President and Chief Executive Officer, AmeriSphere 2006
Multifamily Finance, LLC, Omaha, Nebraska
Michael J. Nelson .......... Chairman, FirsTier Bank, Kimball, Nebraska 2006
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Terry L. Moore ............. President, Omaha Federation of Labor, 2004
Omaha, Nebraska
James A. Timmerman ...... Chief Financial Officer and Secretary/Treasurer, 2005
Timmerman and Sons Feeding Co.,
Springfield, Nebraska
A.F. Raimondo ............. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Behlen Mfg. Co., Columbus, Nebraska
DISTRICT 11—DALLAS
Reserve Bank
Class A
David S. Barnard ........... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, National Bank, 2004
Gatesville, Texas
Richard W. Evans, Jr. ....... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Cullen/Frost 2005
Bankers, Inc., San Antonio, Texas
Matthew T. Doyle .......... Vice Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Texas First Bank, Texas City, Texas
Class B
Vacancy ..................... 2004
Malcolm Gillis .............. University Professor and Past President, 2005
Rice University, Houston, Texas
Judy Ley Allen ............. Partner, Allen Investments, Houston, Texas 2006
Class C
Ray L. Hunt ................ Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Hunt Consolidated, Inc., Dallas, Texas
Patricia M. Patterson ....... President, Patterson Investments, Inc., Dallas, Texas 2005
Anthony R. Chase .......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, ChaseCom, LP, 2006
Houston, Texas
El Paso Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
F. James Volk ............... Regional President, State National Bank, El Paso, Texas 2004
Pete Cook ................... President and Chief Executive Officer, First National 2005
Bank of Alamogordo, Alamogordo, New Mexico
Fred J. Loya ................ Chairman, Fred Loya Insurance, El Paso, Texas 2005
Gerald J. Rubin ............. Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
Helen of Troy Corporation Limited, El Paso, Texas
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Cecilia Ochoa Levine ...... President, MFI International Mfg., LLC, El Paso, Texas 2004

258 91st Annual Report, 2004
Directors—Continued
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Ron C. Helm ................ Owner, Helm Land and Cattle Company, 2005
Van Horn, Texas
William V. Flores ........... Provost, New Mexico State University, 2006
Las Cruces, New Mexico
Houston Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Richard W. Weekley ........ Chairman, Weekley Development Company, 2004
Houston, Texas
Priscilla D. Slade ........... President, Texas Southern University, Houston, Texas 2005
S. Reed Morian ............. Chairman, Chief Executive Officer, and President, 2005
DX Service Company, Inc., Houston, Texas
Timothy N. Bryan .......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, The First 2006
National Bank of Bryan, Bryan, Texas
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
James T. Hackett ........... President and Chief Executive Officer, Anadarko 2004
Petroleum Corporation, Houston, Texas
Lupe Fraga .................. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Tejas Office Products, Inc., Houston, Texas
Vacancy ..................... 2006
San Antonio Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
R. Tom Roddy .............. Chairman, Lone Star Capital Bank, N.A., 2004
San Antonio, Texas
Matt F. Gorges .............. Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Valley 2005
International Cold Storage, Inc., Harlingen, Texas
Daniel B. Hastings, Jr. ...... President and Owner, Daniel B. Hastings, Inc., 2005
Laredo, Texas
Steven R. Vandegrift ....... Founder and President, SRV Holdings, Austin, Texas, 2006
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Ron R. Harris ............... General Partner, Southwest Capital Partners, 2004
Austin, Texas
Elizabeth Chu Richter ...... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, 2005
Richter Architects, Corpus Christi, Texas
Marvin L. Ragsdale ........ President, Iron Workers District Council of the State 2006
of Texas, Georgetown, Texas
DISTRICT 12—SAN FRANCISCO
Reserve Bank
Class A
Richard W. Decker, Jr. ...... Chairman and Co-Founder, Belvedere Capital 2004
Partners, LLC, San Francisco, California
Candace Hunter Wiest ...... President, Inland Empire National Bank, 2005
Riverside, California
Richard C. Hartnack ........ Vice Chairman, Union Bank of California, 2006
Los Angeles, California

Federal Reserve System Organization 259
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Class B
Jack McNally ............... Principal, JKM Consulting, Sacramento, California 2004
David K.Y. Tang ............ Partner, Preston Gates & Ellis LLP, Seattle, Washington 2005
Barbara L. Wilson .......... Consultant and Regional Vice President (Retired), 2006
Qwest Communications, Boise, Idaho
Class C
Sheila D. Harris ............ Director, Arizona Department of Housing, 2004
Phoenix, Arizona
George M. Scalise .......... President, Semiconductor Industry Association, 2005
San Jose, California
Vacancy ..................... 2006
Los Angeles Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Russell Goldsmith .......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, City National 2004
Bank, Beverly Hills, California
Peter M. Thomas ........... Managing Partner, Thomas & Mack Co., 2005
Las Vegas, Nevada
D. Linn Wiley .............. President and Chief Executive Officer, Citizens Business 2006
Bank, Ontario, California
Karen Caplan ............... President and Chief Executive Officer, Frieda’s, Inc., 2006
Los Alamitos, California
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
William D. Jones ........... Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
CityLink Investment Corporation,
San Diego, California
Diane Donoghue ............ Executive Director, Esperanza Community Housing 2005
Corporation, Los Angeles, California
Anita Santiago .............. President, Anita Santiago Advertising, 2006
Santa Monica, California
Portland Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
George J. Passadore ........ Chairman, Oregon, Wells Fargo Bank, Portland, Oregon 2004
William D. Thorndike, Jr. .. President, Medford Fabrication, Medford, Oregon 2005
James H. Rudd ............. Chief Executive Officer, Ferguson Wellman Capital 2005
Management, Inc., Portland, Oregon
Robert D. Sznewajs ........ President and Chief Executive Officer, West Coast 2006
Bancorp, Lake Oswego, Oregon
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Karla S. Chambers .......... Vice President, Stahlbush Island Farms, Inc., 2004
Corvallis, Oregon
Peter O. Kohler ............. President, Oregon Health & Science University, 2005
Portland, Oregon
Judi Johansen ............... President and Chief Executive Officer, PacifiCorp, 2006
Portland, Oregon

260 91st Annual Report, 2004
Directors—Continued
Bank or Branch, Category Term expires
Title
Name Dec. 31
Salt Lake City Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Curtis H. Harris ............. Chairman, President, and Chief Executive Officer, 2004
Barnes Banking Company, Kaysville, Utah
A. Scott Anderson .......... President and Chief Executive Officer, Zions First 2005
National Bank, Salt Lake City, Utah
Deborah Bayle Nielsen ..... President and Chief Executive Officer, United Way 2005
of Salt Lake, Salt Lake City, Utah
Annette K. Herman ......... President and Chief Executive Officer, 2006
UnitedHealthcare, Salt Lake City, Utah
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Gary L. Crocker ............ Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, AnZenBio, 2004
Salt Lake City, Utah
H. Roger Boyer ............. Chairman, The Boyer Company, Salt Lake City, Utah 2005
William C. Glynn ........... President, Intermountain Industries, Inc., Boise, Idaho 2006
Seattle Branch
Appointed by the
Federal Reserve Bank
Peter H. van Oppen ......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Advanced 2004
Digital Information Corp., Redmond, Washington
Mary E. Pugh ............... President, Pugh Capital Management, Inc., 2005
Seattle, Washington
Kenneth M. Kirkpatrick .... President, U.S. Bank, Seattle, Washington 2005
Helvi K. Sandvik ........... President, NANA Development Corp., 2006
Anchorage, Alaska
Appointed by the
Board of Governors
Mic R. Dinsmore ........... Chief Executive Officer, Port of Seattle, 2004
Seattle, Washington
James R. Gill ............... President, Pacific Northwest Title, Seattle, Washington 2005
David W. Wyckoff .......... Chairman and Chief Executive Officer, Wyckoff 2006
Farms, Inc., Grandview, Washington

Members of the Board of Governors, 1913–2004 261
Members of the Board of Governors, 1913–2004
Appointed Members
Federal Reserve Date initially took
Name Other dates1
District oathofoffice
Charles S. Hamlin Boston Aug. 10, 1914 Reappointed in 1916 and 1926. Served
until Feb. 3, 1936.2
Paul M. Warburg New York Aug. 10, 1914 Term expired Aug. 9, 1918.
Frederic A. Delano Chicago Aug. 10, 1914 Resigned July 21, 1918.
W.P.G. Harding Atlanta Aug. 10, 1914 Term expired Aug. 9, 1922.
Adolph C. Miller San Francisco Aug. 10, 1914 Reappointed in 1924. Reappointed in 1934
from the Richmond District. Served
until Feb. 3, 1936.2
Albert Strauss New York Oct. 26, 1918 Resigned Mar. 15, 1920.
Henry A. Moehlenpah Chicago Nov. 10, 1919 Term expired Aug. 9, 1920.
Edmund Platt New York June 8, 1920 Reappointed in 1928. Resigned Sept. 14,
1930.
David C. Wills Cleveland Sept. 29, 1920 Term expired Mar. 4, 1921.
John R. Mitchell Minneapolis May 12, 1921 Resigned May 12, 1923.
Milo D. Campbell Chicago Mar. 14, 1923 Died Mar. 22, 1923.
Daniel R. Crissinger Cleveland May 1, 1923 Resigned Sept. 15, 1927.
George R. James St. Louis May 14, 1923 Reappointed in 1931. Served until Feb. 3,
1936.3
Edward H. Cunningham Chicago May 14, 1923 Died Nov. 28, 1930.
Roy A. Young Minneapolis Oct. 4, 1927 Resigned Aug. 31, 1930.
Eugene Meyer New York Sept. 16, 1930 Resigned May 10, 1933.
Wayland W. Magee Kansas City May 18, 1931 Term expired Jan. 24, 1933.
Eugene R. Black Atlanta May 19, 1933 Resigned Aug. 15, 1934.
M.S. Szymczak Chicago June 14, 1933 Reappointed in 1936 and 1948. Resigned
May 31, 1961.
J.J. Thomas Kansas City June 14, 1933 Served until Feb. 10, 1936.2
Marriner S. Eccles San Francisco Nov. 15, 1934 Reappointed in 1936, 1940, and 1944.
Resigned July 14, 1951.
Joseph A. Broderick New York Feb. 3, 1936 Resigned Sept. 30, 1937.
John K. McKee Cleveland Feb. 3, 1936 Served until Apr. 4, 1946.2
Ronald Ransom Atlanta Feb. 3, 1936 Reappointed in 1942. Died Dec. 2, 1947.
Ralph W. Morrison Dallas Feb. 10, 1936 Resigned July 9, 1936.
Chester C. Davis Richmond June 25, 1936 Reappointed in 1940. Resigned Apr. 15,
1941.
Ernest G. Draper New York Mar. 30, 1938 Served until Sept. 1, 1950.2
Rudolph M. Evans Richmond Mar. 14, 1942 Served until Aug. 13, 1954.2
James K. Vardaman, Jr. St. Louis Apr. 4, 1946 Resigned Nov. 30, 1958.
Lawrence Clayton Boston Feb. 14, 1947 Died Dec. 4, 1949.
Thomas B. McCabe Philadelphia Apr. 15, 1948 Resigned Mar. 31, 1951.
Edward L. Norton Atlanta Sept. 1, 1950 Resigned Jan. 31, 1952.
Oliver S. Powell Minneapolis Sept. 1, 1950 Resigned June 30, 1952.
Wm. McC. Martin, Jr. New York April 2, 1951 Reappointed in 1956. Term expired
Jan. 31, 1970.
A.L. Mills, Jr. San Francisco Feb. 18, 1952 Reappointed in 1958. Resigned Feb. 28,
1965.
J.L. Robertson Kansas City Feb. 18, 1952 Reappointed in 1964. Resigned Apr. 30,
1973.
C. Canby Balderston Philadelphia Aug. 12, 1954 Served through Feb. 28, 1966.
Paul E. Miller Minneapolis Aug. 13, 1954 Died Oct. 21, 1954.

262 91st Annual Report, 2004
Appointed Members—Continued
Federal Reserve Date initially took
Name Other dates1
District oathofoffice
Chas. N. Shepardson Dallas Mar. 17, 1955 Retired Apr. 30, 1967.
G.H. King, Jr. Atlanta Mar. 25, 1959 Reappointed in 1960. Resigned Sept. 18,
1963.
George W. Mitchell Chicago Aug. 31, 1961 Reappointed in 1962. Served until
Feb. 13, 1976.2
J. Dewey Daane Richmond Nov. 29, 1963 Served until Mar. 8, 1974.2
Sherman J. Maisel San Francisco Apr. 30, 1965 Served through May 31, 1972.
Andrew F. Brimmer Philadelphia Mar. 9, 1966 Resigned Aug. 31, 1974.
William W. Sherrill Dallas May 1, 1967 Reappointed in 1968. Resigned Nov. 15,
1971.
Arthur F. Burns New York Jan. 31, 1970 Term began Feb. 1, 1970. Resigned
Mar. 31, 1978.
John E. Sheehan St. Louis Jan. 4, 1972 Resigned June 1, 1975.
Jeffrey M. Bucher San Francisco June 5, 1972 Resigned Jan. 2, 1976.
Robert C. Holland Kansas City June 11, 1973 Resigned May 15, 1976.
Henry C. Wallich Boston Mar. 8, 1974 Resigned Dec. 15, 1986.
Philip E. Coldwell Dallas Oct. 29, 1974 Served through Feb. 29, 1980.
Philip C. Jackson, Jr. Atlanta July 14, 1975 Resigned Nov. 17, 1978.
J. Charles Partee Richmond Jan. 5, 1976 Served until Feb. 7, 1986.2
Stephen S. Gardner Philadelphia Feb. 13, 1976 Died Nov. 19, 1978.
David M. Lilly Minneapolis June 1, 1976 Resigned Feb. 24, 1978.
G. William Miller San Francisco Mar. 8, 1978 Resigned Aug. 6, 1979.
Nancy H. Teeters Chicago Sept. 18, 1978 Served through June 27, 1984.
Emmett J. Rice New York June 20, 1979 Resigned Dec. 31, 1986.
Frederick H. Schultz Atlanta July 27, 1979 Served through Feb. 11, 1982.
Paul A. Volcker Philadelphia Aug. 6, 1979 Resigned August 11, 1987.
Lyle E. Gramley Kansas City May 28, 1980 Resigned Sept. 1, 1985.
Preston Martin San Francisco Mar. 31, 1982 Resigned April 30, 1986.
Martha R. Seger Chicago July 2, 1984 Resigned March 11, 1991.
Wayne D. Angell Kansas City Feb. 7, 1986 Served through Feb. 9, 1994.
Manuel H. Johnson Richmond Feb. 7, 1986 Resigned August 3, 1990.
H. Robert Heller San Francisco Aug. 19, 1986 Resigned July 31, 1989.
Edward W. Kelley, Jr. Dallas May 26, 1987 Resigned Dec. 31, 2001.
Alan Greenspan New York Aug. 11, 1987 Reappointed in 1992.
John P. LaWare Boston Aug. 15, 1988 Resigned April 30, 1995.
David W. Mullins, Jr. St. Louis May 21, 1990 Resigned Feb. 14, 1994.
Lawrence B. Lindsey Richmond Nov. 26, 1991 Resigned Feb. 5, 1997.
Susan M. Phillips Chicago Dec. 2, 1991 Served through June 30, 1998.
Alan S. Blinder Philadelphia June 27, 1994 Term expired Jan. 31, 1996.
Janet L. Yellen San Francisco Aug. 12, 1994 Resigned Feb. 17, 1997.
Laurence H. Meyer St. Louis June 24, 1996 Term expired Jan. 31, 2002.
Alice M. Rivlin Philadelphia June 25, 1996 Resigned July 16, 1999.
Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Boston Nov. 5, 1997 Reappointed in 2001.
Edward M. Gramlich Richmond Nov. 5, 1997
Susan S. Bies Chicago Dec. 7, 2001
Mark W. Olson Minneapolis Dec. 7, 2001
Ben S. Bernanke Atlanta Aug. 5, 2002 Reappointed in 2003.
Donald L. Kohn Kansas City Aug. 5, 2002

Members of the Board of Governors, 1913–2004 263
Appointed Members—Continued
Name Term
Chairmen 3
Charles S. Hamlin Aug. 10, 1914–Aug. 9, 1916
W.P.G. Harding Aug. 10, 1916–Aug. 9, 1922
Daniel R. Crissinger May 1, 1923–Sept. 15, 1927
Roy A. Young Oct. 4, 1927–Aug. 31, 1930
Eugene Meyer Sept. 16, 1930–May 10, 1933
Eugene R. Black May 19, 1933–Aug. 15, 1934
Marriner S. Eccles Nov. 15, 1934–Jan. 31, 1948 4
Thomas B. McCabe Apr. 15, 1948–Mar. 31, 1951
Wm. McC. Martin, Jr. Apr. 2, 1951–Jan. 31, 1970
Arthur F. Burns Feb. 1, 1970–Jan. 31, 1978
G. William Miller Mar. 8, 1978–Aug. 6, 1979
Paul A. Volcker Aug. 6, 1979–Aug. 11, 1987
Alan Greenspan Aug. 11, 1987– 5
Vice Chairmen 3
Frederic A. Delano Aug. 10, 1914–Aug. 9, 1916
Paul M. Warburg Aug. 10, 1916–Aug. 9, 1918
Albert Strauss Oct. 26, 1918–Mar. 15, 1920
Edmund Platt July 23, 1920–Sept. 14, 1930
J.J. Thomas Aug. 21, 1934–Feb. 10, 1936
Ronald Ransom Aug. 6, 1936–Dec. 2, 1947
C. Canby Balderston Mar. 11, 1955–Feb. 28, 1966
J.L. Robertson Mar. 1, 1966–Apr. 30, 1973
George W. Mitchell May 1, 1973–Feb. 13, 1976
Stephen S. Gardner Feb. 13, 1976–Nov. 19, 1978
Frederick H. Schultz July 27, 1979–Feb. 11, 1982
Preston Martin Mar. 31, 1982–Apr. 30, 1986
Manuel H. Johnson Aug. 4, 1986–Aug. 3, 1990
David W. Mullins, Jr. July 24, 1991–Feb. 14, 1994
Alan S. Blinder June 27, 1994–Jan. 31, 1996
Alice M. Rivlin June 25, 1996–July 16, 1999
Roger W. Ferguson, Jr. Oct. 5, 1999–
Note. Under the original Federal Reserve Act, the office on Aug. 23, 1935, continue to serve until Feb. 1,
Federal Reserve Board was composed of five appointed 1936, or until their successors were appointed and had
members, the Secretary of the Treasury (ex officio chair­ qualified; and that thereafter the terms of members be
man of the Board), and the Comptroller of the Currency. fourteen years and that the designation of Chairman and
The original term of office was ten years; the five original Vice Chairman of the Board be for four years.
appointed members had terms of two, four, six, eight, and 1. Date following ‘‘Resigned’’ and ‘‘Retired’’ denotes
ten years. In 1922 the number of appointed members was final day of service.
increased to six, and in 1933 the term of office was raised 2. Successor took office on this date.
to twelve years. The Banking Act of 1935 changed the 3. Before Aug. 23, 1935, Chairmen and Vice Chair­
name to the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve men were designated Governor and Vice Governor.
System and provided that the Board be composed of 4. Served as Chairman Pro Tempore from February 3,
seven appointed members; that the Secretary of the Trea­ 1948, to April 15, 1948.
sury and the Comptroller of the Currency continue to 5. Served as Chairman Pro Tempore from March 3,
serve until Feb. 1, 1936; that the appointed members in 1996, to June 20, 1996.

264 91st Annual Report, 2004
Ex Officio Members
Name Term
Secretaries of the Treasury
W.G. McAdoo Dec. 23, 1913–Dec. 15, 1918
Carter Glass Dec. 16, 1918–Feb. 1, 1920
David F. Houston Feb. 2, 1920–Mar. 3, 1921
Andrew W. Mellon Mar. 4, 1921–Feb. 12, 1932
Ogden L. Mills Feb. 12, 1932–Mar. 4, 1933
William H. Woodin Mar. 4, 1933–Dec. 31, 1933
Henry Morgenthau, Jr. Jan. 1, 1934–Feb. 1, 1936
Comptrollers of the Currency
John Skelton Williams Feb. 2, 1914–Mar. 2, 1921
Daniel R. Crissinger Mar. 17, 1921–Apr. 30, 1923
Henry M. Dawes May 1, 1923–Dec. 17, 1924
Joseph W. McIntosh Dec. 20, 1924–Nov. 20, 1928
J.W. Pole Nov. 21, 1928–Sept. 20, 1932
J.F.T. O’Connor May 11, 1933–Feb. 1, 1936

Statistical Tables

266 91st Annual Report, 2004
1. Statement of Condition of the Federal Reserve Banks,
by Bank, December 31, 2004 and 2003
Millions of dollars
Total Boston
Item
2004 2003 2004 2003
Assets
Gold certificate account ................................ 11,041 11,039 494 495
Special drawing rights certificate account ............... 2,200 2,200 115 115
Coin .................................................. 728 722 19 23
Loans
To depository institutions .............................. 43 62 1 0
Other ................................................. 0 0 0 0
Securities purchased under agreements
to resell (triparty) ................................. 33,000 43,750 0 0
Federal agency obligations
Bought outright ........................................ 0 0 0 0
Held under repurchase agreements ...................... 0 0 0 0
U.S. Treasury securities
Bought outright1 ....................................... 717,819 666,665 33,707 32,230
Held under repurchase agreements ...................... 0 0 0 0
Total loans and securities .......................... 750,863 710,477 33,708 32,230
Items in process of collection .......................... 7,964 9,236 457 531
Bank premises ......................................... 1,778 1,630 99 93
Other assets
Denominated in foreign currencies2 .................... 21,368 19,868 1,083 1,034
Other3 ................................................ 19,004 18,722 1,182 762
Interdistrict settlement account ......................... 0 0 2,979 3,079
Total assets ........................................... 814,946 773,894 40,136 38,363
Liabilities
Federal Reserve notes outstanding (issued to Bank) ..... 848,370 799,933 38,054 38,627
Less: Notes held by Federal Reserve Bank ........... 128,933 110,176 4,137 4,750
Federal Reserve notes, net ............................. 719,437 689,757 33,917 33,877
Securities sold under agreements to repurchase .......... 30,783 25,652 1,445 1,240
Deposits
Depository institutions ................................. 24,043 23,058 1,050 1,633
U.S. Treasury, general account ......................... 5,912 5,723 0 0
Foreign, official accounts .............................. 80 162 2 2
Other4 ................................................ 1,288 730 2 19
Total deposits ..................................... 31,323 29,673 1,054 1,653
Deferred credit items .................................. 7,038 9,026 578 576
Other liabilities and accrued dividends5 ................. 2,821 2,092 151 119
Total liabilities ........................................ 791,402 756,200 37,145 37,466
Capital Accounts
Capital paid in ........................................ 11,914 8,847 1,638 448
Surplus ............................................... 11,630 8,847 1,353 448
Other capital accounts ................................. 0 0 0 0
Total liabilities and capital accounts .................. 814,946 773,894 40,136 38,363
Federal Reserve Note Statement
Federal Reserve notes outstanding ...................... 848,370 799,933 . . . . . .
Less: Held by Banks not subject to collateralization ... 128,933 110,176 . . . . . .
Collateralized Federal Reserve notes .................. 719,437 689,757 ... ...
Collateral for Federal Reserve notes
Gold certificate account ................................ 11,041 11,039 . . . . . .
Special drawing rights certificate account ............... 2,200 2,200 . . . . . .
Other eligible assets ................................... 0 0 . . . . . .
U.S. Treasury and federal agency securities ............. 706,196 676,518 . . . . . .
Total collateral ........................................ 719,437 689,757 ... ...
Fornotesseeendoftable.

Statistical Tables 267
1.—Continued
New York Philadelphia Cleveland Richmond
2004 2003 2004 2003 2004 2003 2004 2003
4,651 4,706 382 380 452 477 819 808
874 874 83 83 104 104 147 147
42 30 56 37 52 33 62 83
0 1 5 5 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
33,000 43,750 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
311,256 285,221 21,350 20,843 30,673 31,238 54,557 51,269
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
344,256 328,986 21,354 20,843 30,673 31,238 54,558 51,269
407 803 360 493 814 595 341 714
196 189 53 53 157 151 144 146
4,905 4,289 624 552 1,757 1,665 5,009 4,915
9,176 9,264 530 588 966 793 1,337 1,384
−24,125 −19,034 4,007 905 −495 −2,103 −420 2,793
340,381 330,106 27,449 23,934 34,479 32,954 61,996 62,258
335,998 325,387 32,698 29,636 34,511 33,115 64,991 59,949
35,347 23,793 7,973 8,288 5,408 4,740 12,275 9,855
300,651 301,594 24,725 21,347 29,103 28,375 52,716 50,094
13,348 10,975 916 802 1,315 1,202 2,340 1,973
11,388 5,607 603 719 1,272 1,259 1,645 5,087
5,912 5,723 0 0 0 0 0 0
57 139 1 1 2 3 7 7
527 324 28 10 2 26 169 108
17,884 11,792 632 730 1,277 1,288 1,820 5,203
651 1,025 490 451 505 521 544 628
988 658 99 87 149 113 280 213
333,522 326,045 26,861 23,417 32,349 31,500 57,700 58,110
3,430 2,031 294 259 1,065 727 2,148 2,074
3,430 2,031 294 259 1,065 727 2,148 2,074
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
340,381 330,106 27,449 23,934 34,479 32,954 61,996 62,258
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...
... ... ... ... ... ... ... ...

268 91st Annual Report, 2004
1. Statement of Condition of the Federal Reserve Banks,
by Bank, December 31, 2004 and 2003—Continued
Millions of dollars
Atlanta Chicago
Item
2004 2003 2004 2003
Assets
Gold certificate account ................................ 894 863 924 982
Special drawing rights certificate account ............... 166 166 212 212
Coin .................................................. 82 82 111 90
Loans
To depository institutions .............................. 8 5 14 17
Other ................................................. 0 0 0 0
Securities purchased under agreements
to resell (triparty) ................................. 0 0 0 0
Federal agency obligations
Bought outright ........................................ 0 0 0 0
Held under repurchase agreements ...................... 0 0 0 0
U.S. Treasury securities
Bought outright1 ....................................... 48,408 45,037 64,660 67,367
Held under repurchase agreements ...................... 0 0 0 0
Total loans and securities .......................... 48,415 45,043 64,674 67,384
Items in process of collection .......................... 637 723 559 942
Bank premises ......................................... 276 278 157 125
Other assets
Denominated in foreign currencies2 .................... 1,181 1,127 2,232 2,033
Other3 ................................................ 1,076 1,108 1,374 1,571
Interdistrict settlement account.......................... 9,939 4,274 225 −6,831
Total assets ........................................... 62,666 53,664 70,469 66,509
Liabilities
Federal Reserve notes outstanding (issued to Banks) ..... 74,144 66,711 72,517 66,835
Less: Notes held by Federal Reserve Banks ........... 17,376 18,415 9,046 8,141
Federal Reserve notes, net ............................. 56,768 48,296 63,470 58,694
Securities sold under repurchase agreements ............ 2,076 1,733 2,773 2,592
Deposits
Depository institutions ................................. 1,722 1,608 1,762 2,349
U.S. Treasury, general account ......................... 0 0 0 0
Foreign, official accounts .............................. 2 2 3 3
Other4 ................................................ 56 22 246 29
Total deposits ..................................... 1,780 1,632 2,011 2,382
Deferred credit items .................................. 796 855 421 781
Other liabilities and accrued dividends5 ................. 214 170 267 211
Total liabilities ........................................ 61,634 52,686 68,942 64,660
Capital Accounts
Capital paid in ........................................ 516 489 763 924
Surplus ............................................... 516 489 763 924
Other capital accounts ................................. 0 0 0 0
Total liabilities and capital accounts .................. 62,666 53,664 70,469 66,509
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of 2. Valueddailyatmarketexchangerates.
rounding. 3. TheSystemtotalincludesdepositoryinstitutionover­
1. Includes securities loaned—fully guaranteed by U.S. draftsof$1millionfor2004and$3millionfor2003.
Treasury securities pledged with Federal Reserve Banks—
and excludes securities purchased under agreements to
resell.

Statistical Tables 269
1.—Continued
St. Louis Minneapolis Kansas City Dallas San Francisco
2004 2003 2004 2003 2004 2003 2004 2003 2004 2003
325 331 218 224 302 303 525 507 1,055 963
71 71 30 30 66 66 98 98 234 234
36 53 22 23 48 42 93 141 105 84
2 0 13 2 1 2 0 0 0 20
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
21,089 20,974 15,657 14,881 18,863 17,916 32,729 26,126 64,871 53,563
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
21,090 20,974 15,669 14,883 18,864 17,919 32,729 26,126 64,871 53,583
348 341 512 426 653 596 334 383 2,542 2,689
68 49 123 125 82 56 257 187 168 179
551 472 835 805 392 476 267 442 2,532 2,058
487 516 351 368 416 439 716 641 1,395 1,287
1,401 −1,330 −969 −166 1,584 25 1,461 6,997 4,414 11,391
24,377 21,477 16,790 16,720 22,408 19,921 36,479 35,522 77,316 72,467
25,006 23,244 16,370 15,491 24,535 21,599 41,146 39,785 88,401 79,553
2,819 3,961 1,982 1,335 4,497 4,083 7,503 7,129 20,570 15,685
22,187 19,283 14,387 14,155 20,038 17,516 33,643 32,657 67,831 63,868
904 807 671 573 809 689 1,404 1,005 2,782 2,061
479 509 473 564 721 813 684 953 2,244 1,957
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 4 3
27 14 115 12 32 48 26 88 57 30
507 524 590 577 753 861 710 1,041 2,305 1,990
197 308 548 650 409 450 301 487 1,599 2,296
111 98 85 74 92 81 152 110 234 157
23,906 21,020 16,281 16,029 22,101 19,596 36,209 35,301 74,751 70,371
236 228 254 346 153 162 135 111 1,283 1,048
236 228 254 346 153 162 135 111 1,283 1,048
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
24,377 21,477 16,790 16,720 22,408 19,921 36,479 35,522 77,316 72,467
4. Includes international organization deposits of 5. Includes exchange-translation account reflecting the
$144 million for 2004 and $139 million for 2003. monthly revaluation at market exchange rates of foreign
exchange commitments.
. . . Not applicable.

270 91st Annual Report, 2004
2. FederalReserveOpenMarketTransactions,2004
Millionsofdollars
Typeofsecurityandtransaction Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr.
U.S. Treasury Securities1
Outright transactions 2
Treasurybills
Grosspurchases ............................................ 619 747 341 3,516
Grosssales ................................................ 0 0 0 0
Exchanges ................................................. 80,276 61,389 56,267 74,959
Fornewbills ............................................ 80,276 61,389 56,267 74,959
Redemptions ............................................... 0 0 0 0
Otherswithin1year
Grosspurchases ............................................ 0 1,311 0 0
Grosssales ................................................ 0 0 0 0
Maturityshifts ............................................. 0 10,791 16,544 7,293
Exchanges ................................................. 0 −10,700 −16,333 −8,333
Redemptions ............................................... 0 0 0 0
1to5years
Grosspurchases ............................................ 0 1,555 1,293 0
Grosssales ................................................ 0 0 0 0
Maturityshifts ............................................. 0 −9,361 −16,544 −7,293
Exchanges ................................................. 0 9,627 16,333 8,333
5to10years
Grosspurchases ............................................ 0 510 741 0
Grosssales ................................................ 0 0 0 0
Maturityshifts ............................................. 0 −357 0 0
Exchanges ................................................. 0 1,072 0 0
Morethan10years
Grosspurchases ............................................ 0 235 40 0
Grosssales ................................................ 0 0 0 0
Maturityshifts ............................................. 0 −1,072 0 0
Exchanges ................................................. 0 0 0 0
Allmaturities
Grosspurchases ............................................ 619 4,358 2,414 3,516
Grosssales ................................................ 0 0 0 0
Redemptions ............................................... 0 0 0 0
NetchangeinU.S.Treasurysecurities ..................... 619 4,358 2,414 3,516
Fornotesseeendoftable.

Statistical Tables 271
2.—Continued
May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total
409 3,831 952 83 3,473 500 3,155 512 18,138
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
66,123 63,302 78,894 66,355 80,572 59,837 60,682 73,029 821,685
66,123 63,302 78,894 66,355 80,572 59,837 60,682 73,029 821,685
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
1,693 0 1,898 0 0 1,593 0 1,499 7,994
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
9,748 6,998 0 17,703 6,535 0 19,781 7,987 103,380
−8,913 −13,879 0 −21,489 −7,652 0 −23,125 −7,948 −118,373
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
783 1,760 3,078 428 899 2,765 2,284 2,404 17,249
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
−4,066 −6,998 0 −10,029 −6,535 0 −16,031 −7,987 −84,844
6,620 13,879 0 19,771 7,652 0 20,655 7,948 110,819
713 275 244 568 695 1,225 453 340 5,763
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
−2,520 0 0 −5,051 0 0 −84 0 −8,012
2,293 0 0 1,718 0 0 2,471 0 7,554
84 0 29 0 405 400 86 85 1,364
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
−3,163 0 0 −2,624 0 0 −3,666 0 −10,524
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
3,681 5,866 6,202 1,078 5,473 6,484 5,977 4,840 50,507
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
3,681 5,866 6,202 1,078 5,473 6,484 5,977 4,840 50,507

272 91st Annual Report, 2004
2. Federal Reserve Open Market Transactions, 2004—Continued
Millions of dollars
Type of security and transaction Jan. Feb. Mar. Apr.
Federal Agency Obligations
Outright transactions 2
Gross purchases .............................................. 0 0 0 0
Gross sales ................................................... 0 0 0 0
Redemptions ................................................. 0 0 0 0
Net change in federal agency obligations .................. 0 0 0 0
Temporary Transactions
Repurchase agreements 3
Gross purchases .............................................. 138,250 121,750 167,500 163,650
Gross sales ................................................... 158,500 116,500 168,750 165,900
Reverse repurchase agreements 4
Gross purchases .............................................. 416,239 391,676 444,402 443,463
Gross sales ................................................... 410,716 393,309 444,341 442,966
Net change in temporary transactions ...................... −14,727 3,617 −1,189 −1,752
Total net change in System Open Market Account ............ −14,108 7,975 1,225 1,764
Note. Sales, redemptions, and negative figures reduce 2. Excludes the effect of temporary transactions—
holdings of the System Open Market Account; all other repurchase agreements, matched sale–purchase agree­
figures increase such holdings. Components may not sum ments (MSPs), and reverse repurchase agreements
to totals because of rounding. (RRPs).
1. Transactions exclude changes in compensation for 3. Cash value of agreements, which are collateralized
the effects of inflation on the principal of inflation- by U.S. government and federal agency securities.
indexed securities. Transactions include the rollover of 4. Cash value of agreements, which are collateralized
inflation compensation into new securities. by U.S. Treasury securities.

Statistical Tables 273
2.—Continued
May June July Aug. Sept. Oct. Nov. Dec. Total
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
138,500 138,750 173,500 179,500 180,000 153,500 166,750 155,250 1,876,900
133,000 136,000 182,250 172,000 183,000 157,500 158,250 156,000 1,887,650
392,021 427,319 416,602 465,642 510,205 510,553 547,160 655,872 5,621,153
391,293 426,071 417,540 468,417 512,957 511,896 548,325 658,454 5,626,285
6,227 3,998 −9,688 4,725 −5,752 −5,343 7,335 −3,332 −15,882
9,908 9,864 −3,487 5,804 −280 1,140 13,312 1,508 34,626

274 91st Annual Report, 2004
3. Federal Reserve Bank Holdings of U.S. Treasury and Federal Agency Securities,
December 31, 2002–04
Millions of dollars
December 31 Change
Description
2003 to 2002 to
2004 2003 2002
2004 2003
U.S. Treasury Securities
Held outright1 .................................... 717,819 666,665 629,406 51,154 37,259
By remaining maturity
Bills
1–90 days ....................................... 179,748 168,381 153,311 11,367 15,070
91 days to 1 year ................................ 83,222 76,452 73,372 6,770 3,080
Notes and bonds
1 year or less ................................... 116,443 113,301 96,827 3,142 16,474
More than 1 year through 5 years ................ 208,269 180,074 172,758 28,195 7,316
More than 5 years through 10 years .............. 54,372 51,312 53,300 3,060 −1,988
More than 10 years .............................. 75,765 77,146 79,840 −1,381 −2,694
By type
Bills .............................................. 262,970 244,833 226,682 18,137 18,151
Notes ............................................. 360,832 323,361 297,893 37,471 25,468
Bonds ............................................. 94,017 98,471 104,832 −4,454 −6,361
Federal Agency Securities
Held outright1 .................................... 0 0 10 0 −10
By remaining maturity
1 year or less ...................................... 0 0 10 0 −10
More than 1 year through 5 years .................. 0 0 0 0 0
More than 5 years through 10 years ................ 0 0 0 0 0
More than 10 years ................................ 0 0 0 0 0
By issuer
Federal National Mortgage Association ............. 0 0 10 0 −10
Temporary Transactions
Repurchase agreements 2 .......................... 33,000 43,750 39,500 −10,750 4,250
Matched sale–purchase agreements ............... 0 0 0 0 0
Foreign official and international accounts ........ 0 0 0 0 0
Dealers ......................................... 0 0 0 0 0
Reverse repurchase agreements 3 .................. 30,783 25,652 21,091 5,131 4,561
Foreign official and international accounts ........ 30,783 25,652 21,091 5,131 4,561
Dealers ......................................... 0 0 0 0 0
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of 2. Cash value of agreements, which are collateralized
rounding. by U.S. government and federal agency securities.
1. Excludes the effect of temporary transactions— 3. Cash value of agreements, which are collateralized
repurchase agreements, matched sale–purchase agree- by U.S. Treasury securities.
ments (MSPs), and reverse repurchase agreements
(RRPs).

Statistical Tables 275
4. Number and Annual Salaries of Officers and Employees of the Federal Reserve Banks,
December 31, 2004
President Other officers Employees Total
Federal Reserve
Bank (including Number
Branches) Salary Num­ Salaries Salaries Num­ Salaries
(dollars)1 ber (dollars)1 Full- Part- (dollars)1 ber (dollars)1
time time
Boston .......... 270,900 61 9,284,100 914 112 66,615,928 1,088 76,170,928
New York ....... 310,000 265 47,044,590 2,732 56 190,097,746 3,054 237,452,336
Philadelphia ..... 245,300 57 7,989,500 990 48 48,614,628 1,096 56,849,428
Cleveland ....... 240,500 64 8,719,300 1,400 38 62,609,238 1,503 71,569,038
Richmond ....... 235,000 76 10,407,200 1,715 76 90,915,466 1,868 101,557,666
Atlanta .......... 294,300 74 11,099,000 1,947 39 96,235,343 2,061 107,628,643
Chicago ......... 293,700 92 13,030,938 1,562 62 100,031,698 1,717 113,356,336
St. Louis ........ 248,100 74 10,270,100 985 55 50,158,181 1,115 60,676,381
Minneapolis ..... 275,000 43 6,172,000 1,158 132 57,721,267 1,334 64,168,267
Kansas City ..... 269,800 76 10,645,200 1,350 46 67,793,739 1,473 78,708,739
Dallas ........... Vacant 2 54 7,089,154 1,184 35 58,676,998 1,273 65,766,152
San Francisco . . . 300,000 73 12,051,966 1,761 38 108,706,295 1,873 121,058,261
Federal Reserve
Information
Technology . . . . 32 4,761,900 691 4 53,371,219 727 58,133,119
Office of
Employee
Benefits .... . . . 6 1,201,300 29 0 2,369,000 35 3,570,300
Total ........... 2,982,600 1,047 159,766,248 18,418 741 1,053,916,746 20,217 1,216,665,594
1. Annualized salary liability based on salaries in effect 2. Dallas president separated in November 2004.
on December 31, 2004. . . . Not applicable.

276 91st Annual Report, 2004
5. Income and Expenses of the Federal Reserve Banks, by Bank, 2004
Thousands of dollars
Item Total Boston New York Philadelphia Cleveland
Current Income
Loans ......................... 2,653 185 379 70 47
U.S. Treasury and federal
agency securities .......... 22,344,362 1,040,391 9,855,437 662,490 962,401
Foreign currencies ............. 269,424 13,677 61,630 7,852 22,172
Priced services ................ 865,924 37,678 124,144 38,469 61,225
Other ......................... 57,579 975 40,846 622 1,410
Total ......................... 23,539,942 1,092,906 10,082,437 709,504 1,047,256
Current Expenses
Salaries and other personnel
expenses ................. 1,350,934 76,036 261,274 65,141 76,054
Retirement and other benefits . . 310,508 14,679 71,851 9,462 26,723
Net periodic pension costs1 .... −33,957 179 −35,938 139 169
Fees .......................... 96,778 2,206 8,908 1,196 6,606
Travel ........................ 56,528 2,051 7,419 1,918 4,067
Software expenses ............. 116,624 5,047 12,820 4,273 11,549
Postage and other shipping
costs ..................... 87,304 1,780 4,415 1,539 2,897
Communications ............... 14,110 1,904 2,472 421 657
Materials and supplies ......... 45,679 2,296 8,551 3,046 3,470
Building expenses
Taxes on real estate ............ 31,079 4,707 4,452 1,561 1,921
Property depreciation .......... 88,214 4,983 14,581 3,595 6,558
Utilities ....................... 32,217 2,900 6,472 2,464 1,998
Rent .......................... 40,812 778 16,083 305 351
Other ......................... 34,944 933 6,854 2,002 2,605
Equipment
Purchases ..................... 26,881 1,050 4,752 834 1,713
Rentals ........................ 31,836 1,770 1,847 640 342
Depreciation ................... 101,172 5,575 9,049 5,838 5,937
Repairs and maintenance ....... 92,374 6,079 8,662 5,513 6,668
Earnings-credit costs ........... 116,033 5,900 38,756 7,454 8,230
Other ......................... 70,805 29,769 48,381 9,532 9,865
Recoveries .................... −79,364 −11,838 −9,695 −3,196 −2,542
Expenses capitalized 2 .......... −22,825 −495 −6,880 −2,006 −265
Total ......................... 2,608,684 158,288 485,085 121,669 175,573
Reimbursements ............. −369,979 −23,030 −74,709 −21,111 −42,854
Net expenses ............. 2,238,705 135,259 410,377 100,559 132,718
For notes see end of table.

Statistical Tables 277
5.—Continued
Richmond Atlanta Chicago St. Louis Minneapolis Kansas City Dallas San Francisco
55 109 551 178 549 256 28 247
1,676,581 1,483,890 2,041,238 657,563 482,515 581,234 967,792 1,932,829
63,356 14,915 28,114 6,920 10,545 5,030 3,515 31,696
66,718 160,899 114,006 39,916 45,601 52,761 46,416 78,090
2,520 2,003 2,677 899 439 550 886 3,752
1,809,230 1,661,817 2,186,586 705,476 539,649 639,831 1,018,637 2,046,613
178,316 127,914 121,506 71,919 66,896 91,096 74,450 140,332
38,006 24,164 22,251 13,643 16,270 14,410 19,045 40,004
249 177 167 186 197 137 151 229
50,376 6,546 5,514 6,564 1,603 1,156 2,278 3,826
8,089 5,790 6,500 3,506 2,992 4,223 3,145 6,829
51,250 4,579 3,984 3,384 2,505 3,704 5,183 8,349
4,164 51,388 4,473 2,377 2,734 3,138 2,361 6,038
1,780 1,034 1,239 979 1,011 742 708 1,164
6,029 5,647 3,665 2,450 1,682 2,497 2,983 3,363
2,157 3,417 1,590 477 3,860 1,112 2,834 2,992
7,919 10,080 9,042 4,602 4,548 4,223 5,646 12,438
3,502 2,801 1,885 1,837 1,668 1,683 1,935 3,072
14,586 899 3,186 1,291 233 1,666 1,288 148
4,413 3,467 5,034 1,117 1,577 916 3,739 2,287
7,672 2,002 1,701 1,283 1,339 1,587 1,165 1,783
23,509 726 565 197 541 316 939 445
36,588 8,255 4,831 3,617 2,314 4,746 5,062 9,360
20,302 11,142 8,855 3,755 2,948 3,362 5,346 9,741
16,512 5,318 13,704 1,786 2,309 3,644 2,326 10,094
−235,234 15,106 43,740 65,884 17,747 19,042 31,328 15,646
−26,824 −2,660 −6,227 −1,656 −843 −2,847 −6,196 −4,840
−1,933 −455 −782 −3,819 −1,265 −1,639 −1,133 −2,153
211,428 287,336 256,420 185,379 132,864 158,914 164,583 271,146
−31,751 −16,555 −7,044 −90,742 −21,350 −13,648 −11,578 −15,607
179,677 270,780 249,376 94,636 111,514 145,265 153,005 255,539

278 91st Annual Report, 2004
5. Income and Expenses of the Federal Reserve Banks, by Bank, 2004—Continued
Thousands of dollars
Item Total Boston New York Philadelphia Cleveland
Profit and Loss
Current net income ............ 21,301,238 957,648 9,672,060 608,945 914,537
Additions to and deductions
from (−) current net income 3
Profits on sales of U.S. Treasury
and federal agency
securities .................. 0 0 0 0 0
Profits on foreign exchange
transactions ............... 1,230,325 62,418 281,819 35,898 101,203
Other additions ................ 396 2 40 21 15
Total additions ....... 1,230,721 62,420 281,859 35,918 101,219
Losses on sales of U.S. Treasury
and federal agency
securities ................. 0 0 0 0 0
Losses on foreign exchange
transactions ............... −13,175 0 0 0 −13,175
Interest expense on reverse
repurchase agreements .... −290,153 −14,315 −131,228 −9,101 0
Other deductions .............. −9,487 −1 −19 −4 −1
Total deductions ...... −312,815 −14,316 −131,247 −9,105 −13,176
Net addition to or
deduction from (−)
current net income ...... 917,906 48,104 150,612 26,813 88,042
Cost of unreimbursed Treasury
services .................. 35 0 25 10 0
Assessments by Board
Board expenditures 4 ........... 272,331 14,095 62,507 8,023 22,192
Cost of currency ............... 503,784 33,919 117,119 26,153 23,070
Net income before payment to
U.S. Treasury ............. 21,442,992 957,738 9,643,022 601,573 957,317
Dividends paid ................ 582,402 53,156 136,390 16,824 45,121
Payments to U.S. Treasury
(interest on Federal
Reserve notes) ............ 18,078,003 0 8,107,622 549,401 574,815
Transferred to/from surplus .... 2,782,587 904,581 1,399,011 35,348 337,381
Surplus, January 1 ............. 8,846,916 448,422 2,030,557 258,560 727,244
Surplus, December 31 ......... 11,629,504 1,353,004 3,429,567 293,908 1,064,625
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of 2. Includes expenses for labor and materials capital­
rounding. ized and depreciated or amortized as charges to activities
1. Reflects the effect of Financial Accounting Stan­ in the periods benefited.
dards Board Statement of Financial Accounting Stan­ 3. Includes reimbursement from the U.S. Treasury for
dards No. 87, Employers’ Accounting for Pensions (SFAS uncut sheets of Federal Reserve notes, gains and losses on
87). The System Retirement Plan for employees is the sale of Reserve Bank buildings, counterfeit currency
recorded on behalf of the System on the books of the that is not charged back to the depositing institution, and
Federal Reserve Bank of New York, resulting in a stale Reserve Bank checks that are written off.
decrease in expenses of $36,556 thousand. The expenses 4. For additional details, see the chapter ‘‘Board of
related to the Benefit Equalization Plan and the Supple­ Governors Financial Statements.’’
mental Retirement Plan are recorded by each Federal
Reserve Bank.

Statistical Tables 279
5.—Continued
Richmond Atlanta Chicago St. Louis Minneapolis Kansas City Dallas San Francisco
1,629,553 1,391,037 1,937,209 610,840 428,135 494,565 865,633 1,791,074
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
288,950 68,071 128,442 31,658 48,113 22,814 15,780 145,157
8 5 5 5 3 8 279 4
288,958 68,077 128,448 31,663 48,116 22,822 16,059 145,162
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
−23,101 −20,462 −27,892 −9,019 −6,642 −8,002 −13,498 −26,893
−3 −184 −1,404 −3 −2 −1 −4 −7,860
−23,104 −20,646 −29,296 −9,022 −6,644 −8,003 −13,502 −34,753
265,854 47,430 99,152 22,641 41,472 14,819 2,556 110,409
0 0 0 0 0 0 0 0
63,193 15,051 28,933 6,979 9,912 4,851 3,514 33,083
39,010 61,605 47,395 16,115 13,671 17,234 42,533 65,960
1,793,204 1,361,811 1,960,033 610,387 446,024 487,299 822,143 1,802,440
125,013 30,224 56,831 13,930 16,461 9,118 7,513 71,819
1,593,869 1,304,705 2,063,931 589,070 520,699 487,495 790,246 1,496,150
74,322 26,882 −160,728 7,387 −91,136 −9,314 24,383 234,471
2,073,888 489,053 924,227 228,257 345,531 162,382 110,570 1,048,225
2,148,210 515,935 763,499 235,644 254,396 153,068 134,953 1,282,696

280 91st Annual Report, 2004
6. Income and Expenses of the Federal Reserve Banks, 1914–2004
Thousands of dollars
Assessments by
Net additions Board of Governors
Federal Reserve Bank Current Net
or
and period income expenses deductions (−)1 Board Costs
expenditures of currency
All Banks
1914–15....................... 2,173 2,018 6 302 . . .
1916........................... 5,218 2,082 −193 192 . . .
1917........................... 16,128 4,922 −1,387 238 . . .
1918........................... 67,584 10,577 −3,909 383 . . .
1919........................... 102,381 18,745 −4,673 595 . . .
1920........................... 181,297 27,549 −3,744 710 . . .
1921........................... 122,866 33,722 −6,315 741 . . .
1922........................... 50,499 28,837 −4,442 723 . . .
1923........................... 50,709 29,062 −8,233 703 . . .
1924........................... 38,340 27,768 −6,191 663 . . .
1925........................... 41,801 26,819 −4,823 709 . . .
1926........................... 47,600 24,914 −3,638 722 1,714
1927........................... 43,024 24,894 −2,457 779 1,845
1928........................... 64,053 25,401 −5,026 698 806
1929........................... 70,955 25,810 −4,862 782 3,099
1930........................... 36,424 25,358 −93 810 2,176
1931........................... 29,701 24,843 311 719 1,479
1932........................... 50,019 24,457 −1,413 729 1,106
1933........................... 49,487 25,918 −12,307 800 2,505
1934........................... 48,903 26,844 −4,430 1,372 1,026
1935........................... 42,752 28,695 −1,737 1,406 1,477
1936........................... 37,901 26,016 486 1,680 2,178
1937........................... 41,233 25,295 −1,631 1,748 1,757
1938........................... 36,261 25,557 2,232 1,725 1,630
1939........................... 38,501 25,669 2,390 1,621 1,356
1940........................... 43,538 25,951 11,488 1,704 1,511
1941........................... 41,380 28,536 721 1,840 2,588
1942........................... 52,663 32,051 −1,568 1,746 4,826
1943........................... 69,306 35,794 23,768 2,416 5,336
1944........................... 104,392 39,659 3,222 2,296 7,220
1945........................... 142,210 41,666 −830 2,341 4,710
1946........................... 150,385 50,493 −626 2,260 4,482
1947........................... 158,656 58,191 1,973 2,640 4,562
1948........................... 304,161 64,280 −34,318 3,244 5,186
1949........................... 316,537 67,931 −12,122 3,243 6,304
1950........................... 275,839 69,822 36,294 3,434 7,316
1951........................... 394,656 83,793 −2,128 4,095 7,581
1952........................... 456,060 92,051 1,584 4,122 8,521
1953........................... 513,037 98,493 −1,059 4,100 10,922
1954........................... 438,486 99,068 −134 4,175 6,490
1955........................... 412,488 101,159 −265 4,194 4,707
1956........................... 595,649 110,240 −23 5,340 5,603
1957........................... 763,348 117,932 −7,141 7,508 6,374
1958........................... 742,068 125,831 124 5,917 5,973
1959........................... 886,226 131,848 98,247 6,471 6,384
1960........................... 1,103,385 139,894 13,875 6,534 7,455
1961........................... 941,648 148,254 3,482 6,265 6,756
1962........................... 1,048,508 161,451 −56 6,655 8,030
1963........................... 1,151,120 169,638 615 7,573 10,063
1964........................... 1,343,747 171,511 726 8,655 17,230
1965........................... 1,559,484 172,111 1,022 8,576 23,603
1966........................... 1,908,500 178,212 996 9,022 20,167
1967........................... 2,190,404 190,561 2,094 10,770 18,790
1968........................... 2,764,446 207,678 8,520 14,198 20,474
1969........................... 3,373,361 237,828 −558 15,020 22,126
Fornotesseeendoftable.

Statistical Tables 281
6.—Continued
Payments to U.S. Treasury
Transferred Transferred
Dividends
paid Statutory Fed In e t r e a r l e R st e o se n r ve (s t e o c t s i u o r n p l 1 u 3 s b ) ( t s o e c s t u i r o p n l u 7 s )
transfers 2
notes
217 ... ... ... ...
1,743 ... ... ... ...
6,804 1,134 . . . . . . 1,134
5,541 . . . . . . . . . 48,334
5,012 2,704 . . . . . . 70,652
5.654 60,725 . . . . . . 82,916
6,120 59,974 . . . . . . 15,993
6,307 10,851 . . . . . . −660
6,553 3,613 . . . . . . 2,546
6,682 114 . . . . . . −3,078
6,916 59 . . . . . . 2,474
7,329 818 . . . . . . 8,464
7,755 250 . . . . . . 5,044
8,458 2,585 . . . . . . 21,079
9,584 4,283 . . . . . . 22,536
10,269 17 . . . . . . −2,298
10,030 ... ... ... −7,058
9,282 2,011 . . . . . . 11,021
8,874 ... ... ... −917
8,782 ... ... −60 6,510
8,505 298 . . . 28 607
7,830 227 . . . 103 353
7,941 177 . . . 67 2,616
8,019 120 . . . − 419 1,862
8,110 25 . . . − 426 4,534
8,215 82 . . . −54 17,617
8,430 141 . . . − 4 571
8,669 198 . . . 50 3,554
8,911 245 . . . 135 40,327
9,500 327 . . . 201 48,410
10,183 248 . . . 262 81,970
10,962 67 . . . 28 81,467
11,523 36 75,284 87 8,366
11,920 . . . 166,690 . . . 18,523
12,329 . . . 193,146 . . . 21,462
13,083 . . . 196,629 . . . 21,849
13,865 . . . 254,874 . . . 28,321
14,682 . . . 291,935 . . . 46,334
15,558 . . . 342,568 . . . 40,337
16,442 . . . 276,289 . . . 35,888
17,712 . . . 251,741 . . . 32,710
18,905 . . . 401,556 . . . 53,983
20,081 . . . 542,708 . . . 61,604
21,197 . . . 524,059 . . . 59,215
22,722 . . . 910,650 . . . −93,601
23,948 . . . 896,816 . . . 42,613
25,570 . . . 687,393 . . . 70,892
27,412 . . . 799,366 . . . 45,538
28,912 . . . 879,685 . . . 55,864
30,782 . . . 1,582,119 . . . − 465,823
32,352 . . . 1,296,810 . . . 27,054
33,696 . . . 1,649,455 . . . 18,944
35,027 . . . 1,907,498 . . . 29,851
36,959 . . . 2,463,629 . . . 30,027
39,237 . . . 3,019,161 . . . 39,432

282 91st Annual Report, 2004
6. Income and Expenses of the Federal Reserve Banks, 1914–2004—Continued
Thousands of dollars
Assessments by
Net additions Board of Governors
Federal Reserve Bank Current Net
or
and period income expenses deductions (−)1 Board Costs
expenditures of currency
1970....................... 3,877,218 276,572 11,442 21,228 23,574
1971....................... 3,723,370 319,608 94,266 32,634 24,943
1972....................... 3,792,335 347,917 −49,616 35,234 31,455
1973....................... 5,016,769 416,879 −80,653 44,412 33,826
1974....................... 6,280,091 476,235 −78,487 41,117 30,190
1975....................... 6,257,937 514,359 −202,370 33,577 37,130
1976....................... 6,623,220 558,129 7,311 41,828 48,819
1977....................... 6,891,317 568,851 −177,033 47,366 55,008
1978....................... 8,455,309 592,558 −633,123 53,322 60,059
1979....................... 10,310,148 625,168 −151,148 50,530 68,391
1980....................... 12,802,319 718,033 −115,386 62,231 73,124
1981....................... 15,508,350 814,190 −372,879 63,163 82,924
1982....................... 16,517,385 926,034 −68,833 61,813 98,441
1983....................... 16,068,362 1,023,678 −400,366 71,551 152,135
1984....................... 18,068,821 1,102,444 −412,943 82,116 162,606
1985....................... 18,131,983 1,127,744 1,301,624 77,378 173,739
1986....................... 17,464,528 1,156,868 1,975,893 97,338 180,780
1987....................... 17,633,012 1,146,911 1,796,594 81,870 170,675
1988....................... 19,526,431 1,205,960 −516,910 84,411 164,245
1989....................... 22,249,276 1,332,161 1,254,613 89,580 175,044
1990....................... 23,476,604 1,349,726 2,099,328 103,752 193,007
1991....................... 22,553,002 1,429,322 405,729 109,631 261,316
1992....................... 20,235,028 1,474,531 −987,788 128,955 295,401
1993....................... 18,914,251 1,657,800 −230,268 140,466 355,947
1994....................... 20,910,742 1,795,328 2,363,862 146,866 368,187
1995....................... 25,395,148 1,818,416 857,788 161,348 370,203
1996 ...................... 25,164,303 1,947,861 −1,676,716 162,642 402,517
1997 ...................... 26,917,213 1,976,453 −2,611,570 174,407 364,454
1998 ...................... 28,149,477 1,833,436 1,906,037 178,009 408,544
1999 ...................... 29,346,836 1,852,162 −533,557 213,790 484,959
2000 ...................... 33,963,992 1,971,688 −1,500,027 188,067 435,838
2001 ...................... 31,870,721 2,084,708 −1,117,435 295,056 338,537
2002 ...................... 26,760,113 2,227,078 2,149,328 205,111 429,568
2003 ...................... 23,792,725 2,462,658 2,481,127 297,020 508,144
2004 ...................... 23,539,942 2,238,705 917,870 272,331 503,784
Total, 1914–2004 .......... 641,749,857 47,193,869 7,777,545 4,138,045 7,862,963
Aggregate for each Bank,
1914–2004
Boston .................... 34,556,554 3,140,957 338,671 175,263 459,567
New York ................. 222,443,921 7,280,428 4 2,102,239 1,009,352 2,573,085
Philadelphia ............... 23,869,631 2,542,934 200,363 169,950 318,524
Cleveland ................. 39,693,014 2,968,781 540,433 296,428 463,041
Richmond ................. 49,669,998 4,141,554 1,059,465 531,065 643,402
Atlanta .................... 33,833,187 4,890,082 546,057 316,723 536,289
Chicago ................... 79,234,017 5,961,783 925,960 488,548 901,978
St. Louis .................. 22,208,274 2,398,978 153,844 107,149 286,799
Minneapolis ............... 10,784,532 2,299,447 218,125 129,234 131,198
Kansas City ............... 23,543,939 3,081,674 198,986 139,470 287,617
Dallas ..................... 29,310,581 3,090,244 457,869 211,688 382,645
San Francisco ............. 72,602,208 5,397,008 1,035,534 563,174 878,816
Total ..................... 641,749,857 47,193,869 7,777,545 4,138,045 7,862,963
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of 2. Represents transfers made as a franchise tax from
rounding. 1917 through 1932; transfers made under section 13b of
. . . Not applicable. the Federal Reserve Act from 1935 through 1947; and
1. For 1987 and subsequent years, includes the cost of transfers made under section 7 of the Federal Reserve Act
services provided to the Treasury by Federal Reserve for 1996 and 1997.
Banks for which reimbursement was not received.

Statistical Tables 283
6.—Continued
Payments to U.S. Treasury
Transferred Transferred
Dividends
paid Statutory Fed In e t r e a r l e R st e o se n r ve (s t e o c t s i u o r n p l 1 u 3 s b ) ( t s o e c s t u i r o p n l u 7 s )
transfers 2 notes
41,137 . . . 3,493,571 . . . 32,580
43,488 . . . 3,356,560 . . . 40,403
46,184 . . . 3,231,268 . . . 50,661
49,140 . . . 4,340,680 . . . 51,178
52,580 . . . 5,549,999 . . . 51,483
54,610 . . . 5,382,064 . . . 33,828
57,351 . . . 5,870,463 . . . 53,940
60,182 . . . 5,937,148 . . . 45,728
63,280 . . . 7,005,779 . . . 47,268
67,194 . . . 9,278,576 . . . 69,141
70,355 . . . 11,706,370 . . . 56,821
74,574 . . . 14,023,723 . . . 76,897
79,352 . . . 15,204,591 . . . 78,320
85,152 . . . 14,228,816 . . . 106,663
92,620 . . . 16,054,095 . . . 161,996
103,029 . . . 17,796,464 . . . 155,253
109,588 . . . 17,803,895 . . . 91,954
117,499 . . . 17,738,880 . . . 173,771
125,616 . . . 17,364,319 . . . 64,971
129,885 . . . 21,646,417 . . . 130,802
140,758 . . . 23,608,398 . . . 180,292
152,553 . . . 20,777,552 . . . 228,356
171,763 . . . 16,774,477 . . . 402,114
195,422 . . . 15,986,765 . . . 347,583
212,090 . . . 20,470,011 . . . 282,122
230,527 . . . 23,389,367 . . . 283,075
255,884 5,517,716 14,565,624 . . . 635,343
299,652 20,658,972 0 . . . 831,705
343,014 17,785,942 8,774,994 . . . 731,575
373,579 . . . 25,409,736 . . . 479,053
409,614 . . . 25,343,892 . . . 4,114,865
428,183 . . . 27,089,222 . . . 517,580
483,596 . . . 24,495,490 . . . 1,068,598
517,705 . . . 22,021,528 . . . 466,796
582,402 . . . 18,078,003 . . . 2,782,587
7,086,659 44,113,958 523,408,737 −4 15,723,176 3
338,234 2,579,504 26,661,526 135 1,540,038
1,739,744 17,307,161 190,344,011 −433 4,292,813
296,712 1,312,118 18,993,444 291 436,021
521,358 2,827,043 31,805,942 −10 1,350,863
964,861 3,083,928 38,208,638 −72 3,156,085
511,227 2,713,230 24,601,609 5 810,079
814,121 4,593,811 66,258,309 12 1,141,414
183,699 1,833,837 17,213,488 −27 338,194
226,818 416,227 7,399,208 65 400,462
227,829 1,249,703 18,486,949 −9 269,691
330,064 1,510,802 23,968,266 55 274,686
931,991 4,686,594 59,467,347 −17 1,712,829
7,086,659 44,113,958 523,408,737 −4 15,723,176 3
3. The $15,723,176 thousand transferred to surplus as statutorily required; and was increased by transfer of
was reduced by direct charges of $500 thousand for $11,131 thousand from reserves for contingencies (1955),
charge-off on Bank premises (1927), $139,300 thousand leaving a balance of $11,629,504 thousand on Decem-
for contributions to capital of the Federal Deposit Insur- ber 31, 2004.
ance Corporation (1934), $4 thousand net upon elimina- 4. This amount is reduced by $2,675,308 thousand
tion of section 13b surplus (1958), and $106,000 thou- for expenses of the System Retirement Plan. See note 1,
sand (1996), $107,000 thousand (1997), and table 5.
$3,752,000 thousand (2000) transferred to the Treasury

284 91st Annual Report, 2004
7. Acquisition Costs and Net Book Value of Premises of the Federal Reserve Banks
and Branches, December 31, 2004
Thousands of dollars
Acquisition costs
Federal Reserve Net Other
Bank or Buildings Building ma­ book real
Branch Land (including chinery and Total 2 value estate 3
vaults)1 equipment
BOSTON ............. 22,074 116,556 19,284 157,914 98,853 . . .
NEW YORK .......... 20,103 218,243 60,251 298,596 192,722 . . .
Buffalo ................ 888 4,142 3,699 8,729 3,462 . . .
PHILADELPHIA ...... 2,561 75,796 11,857 90,214 53,306 . . .
CLEVELAND ......... 3,112 121,824 23,924 148,859 114,370 . . .
Cincinnati ............. 2,247 28,740 11,474 42,460 23,160 . . .
Pittsburgh ............. 1,658 18,806 11,967 32,432 19,349 . . .
RICHMOND .......... 12,923 84,560 38,545 136,028 94,468 . . .
Baltimore ............. 6,482 27,956 5,490 39,929 23,530 . . .
Charlotte .............. 3,130 28,568 6,104 37,802 25,553 . . .
ATLANTA ............ 22,735 146,569 15,786 185,090 171,374 . . .
Birmingham ........... 7,194 46,118 4,170 57,483 52,501 . . .
Jacksonville ........... 1,812 20,302 3,839 25,953 17,656 48
Miami ................ 4,266 17,672 4,728 26,667 17,139 . . .
Nashville .............. 687 6,147 3,305 10,139 5,845 . . .
New Orleans .......... 3,952 9,530 4,943 18,425 11,339 . . .
CHICAGO ............ 4,512 147,541 18,392 170,445 108,476 1,386
Detroit ................ 4,706 46,497 3,358 54,561 48,865 . . .
ST. LOUIS ............ 4,774 52,240 11,160 68,173 45,459 . . .
Little Rock ............ 1,148 4,861 2,155 8,165 4,697 . . .
Louisville ............. 800 4,735 2,068 7,603 3,422 . . .
Memphis .............. 1,136 13,743 4,418 19,297 14,247 . . .
MINNEAPOLIS ....... 15,666 104,234 13,742 133,643 112,292 . . .
Helena ................ 2,890 9,716 958 13,564 10,216 . . .
KANSAS CITY ....... 29,059 28,921 7,999 65,979 48,004 . . .
Denver ................ 3,511 8,859 4,573 16,943 9,310 . . .
Oklahoma City ........ 977 12,195 3,488 16,660 8,574 . . .
Omaha ................ 7,165 11,824 2,477 21,466 15,992 . . .
DALLAS ............. 31,597 111,755 20,675 164,027 124,925 2
El Paso ............... 262 3,533 1,487 5,283 2,330 . . .
Houston ............... 19,908 102,810 0 122,718 122,718 7,202
San Antonio ........... 826 7,414 3,103 11,343 6,713 . . .
SAN FRANCISCO .... 20,084 92,910 22,148 135,142 84,251 . . .
Los Angeles ........... 6,306 69,700 12,533 88,539 60,223 . . .
Portland ............... 1,287 8,764 2,532 12,584 6,801 . . .
Salt Lake City ......... 1,294 4,785 1,600 7,679 3,492 . . .
Seattle ................ 380 14,406 4,699 19,484 12,765 515
Total ................. 274,111 1,832,974 372,933 2,480,018 1,778,399 9,154
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of 3. Covers acquisitions for banking-house purposes and
rounding. Bank premises formerly occupied and being held pending
1. Includes expenditures for construction at some sale.
offices, pending allocation to appropriate accounts. . . . Not applicable.
2. Excludes charge-offs of $17,699 thousand before
1952.

Statistical Tables 285
8. Operations in Principal Departments of the Federal Reserve Banks, 2001–2004
Operation 2004 2003 2002 2001
Millions of pieces (except as noted)
Currency processed ............................ 36,242 34,832 34,208 33,740
Currency destroyed ............................ 6,748 7,375 8,363 7,850
Coin received1 ................................ 55,655 48,138 43,445 39,735
Checks handled
U.S. government checks ..................... 234 267 289 346
Postal money orders ......................... 187 198 216 229
Other ....................................... 13,904 15,806 16,587 16,905
Government securities transfers ................ 20 20 17 15
Transfer of funds .............................. 125 123 115 112
Automated clearinghouse transactions
Commercial ................................. 6,486 5,588 4,986 4,448
Government ................................. 941 914 883 900
Food stamps redeemed ......................... 48 287 500 587
Millions of dollars
Currency processed ............................ 625,127 584,915 565,302 540,746
Currency destroyed ............................ 90,943 101,338 92,511 86,298
Coin received1 ................................ 5,403 4,879 4,579 4,296
Checks handled
U.S. government checks ..................... 277,649 308,055 307,627 333,849
Postal money orders ......................... 29,045 29,197 30,161 30,461
Other ....................................... 14,287,740 15,431,625 15,033,298 14,853,072
Government securities transfers ................ 313,425,252 267,644,194 228,907,121 212,343,034
Transfer of funds .............................. 469,898,863 436,706,269 405,761,750 423,606,365
Automated clearinghouse transactions
Commercial ................................. 12,543,907 13,951,600 13,135,350 12,707,247
Government ................................. 2,913,189 2,810,283 2,711,384 2,528,562
Food stamps redeemed ......................... 239 1,510 2,543 2,989
1. Amounts in bold are restatements due to the inclu­
sion of coin activity at Federal Reserve off-site coin
terminals.

286 91st Annual Report, 2004
9. Federal Reserve Bank Interest Rates on Loans to Depository Institutions,
December 31, 2004
Reserve Bank Primary credit1 Secondary credit 2 Seasonal credit 3
All Federal Reserve Banks .................. 3.25 3.75 2.35
1. Primary credit is available for very short terms as 3. Seasonal credit is available to help relatively small
a backup source of liquidity to depository institutions that depository institutions meet regular seasonal needs for
are in generally sound financial condition in the judgment funds that arise from a clear pattern of intra-yearly move­
of the lending Federal Reserve Bank. ments in their deposits and loans. The discount rate on
2. Secondary credit is available in appropriate circum­ seasonal credit takes into account rates charged by market
stances to depository institutions that do not qualify for sources of funds and is reestablished on the first business
primary credit. day of each two-week reserve maintenance period.

Statistical Tables 287
10. Reserve Requirements of Depository Institutions, December 31, 2004
Requirements
Type of deposit
Percentage of deposits Effective date
Net transaction accounts1
$0 million–$7.0 million 2 ............................... 0 12-23-04
More than $7.0 million–$47.6 million 3 ................. 3 12-23-04
More than $47.6 million ............................... 10 12-23-04
Nonpersonal time deposits ............................. 0 12-27-90
Eurocurrency liabilities ................................ 0 12-27-90
Note. Required reserves must be held in the form of For a more detailed description of these deposit types,
vault cash and, if vault cash is insufficient, also in the see Form FR 2900 at www.federalreserve.gov/boarddocs/
form of a deposit with a Federal Reserve Bank. An reportforms/.
institution that is a member of the Federal Reserve Sys­ 2. The amount of net transaction accounts subject to a
tem must hold that deposit directly with a Reserve Bank; reserve requirement ratio of zero percent (the ‘‘exemption
an institution that is not a member of the System can amount’’ ) is adjusted each year by statute. The exemp­
maintain that deposit directly with a Reserve Bank or tion amount is adjusted upward by 80 percent of the
with another institution in a pass-through relationship. previous year’s (June 30 to June 30) rate of increase in
Reserve requirements are imposed on commercial banks, total reservable liabilities at all depository institutions.
savings banks, savings and loan associations, credit No adjustment is made in the event of a decrease in such
unions, U.S. branches and agencies of foreign banks, liabilities.
Edge corporations, and agreement corporations. 3. The amount of net transaction accounts subject to a
1. Total transaction accounts consists of demand reserve requirement ratio of 3 percent is the ‘‘low-reserve
deposits, automatic transfer service (ATS) accounts, tranche.’’ By statute, the upper limit of the low-reserve
NOW accounts, share draft accounts, telephone or preau­ tranche is adjusted each year by 80 percent of the pre­
thorized transfer accounts, ineligible bankers acceptances, vious year’s (June 30 to June 30) rate of increase or
and obligations issued by affiliates maturing in seven decrease in net transaction accounts held by all depository
days or less. Net transaction accounts are total transaction institutions.
accounts less amounts due from other depository institu­
tions and less cash items in the process of collection.

288 91st Annual Report, 2004
11. Initial Margin Requirements under Regulations T, U, and X
Percent of market value
Margin Convertible Short sales,
Effective date
stocks bonds T only1
1934, Oct. 1 ............................... 25–45 ... ...
1936, Feb. 1 ............................... 25–55 ... ...
Apr. 1 ............................... 55 . . . . . .
1937, Nov. 1 ............................... 40 . . . 50
1945, Feb. 5 ............................... 50 . . . 50
July 5 ............................... 75 . . . 75
1946, Jan. 21 ............................... 100 . . . 100
1947, Feb. 1 ............................... 75 . . . 75
1949, Mar. 3 ............................... 50 . . . 50
1951, Jan. 17 ............................... 75 . . . 75
1953, Feb. 20 .............................. 50 . . . 50
1955, Jan. 4 ................................ 60 . . . 60
Apr. 23 .............................. 70 . . . 70
1958, Jan. 16 ............................... 50 . . . 50
Aug. 5 ............................... 70 . . . 70
Oct. 16 .............................. 90 . . . 90
1960, July 28 .............................. 70 . . . 70
1962, July 10 .............................. 50 . . . 50
1963, Nov. 6 ............................... 70 . . . 70
1968, Mar. 11 .............................. 70 50 70
June 8 ............................... 80 60 80
1970, May 6 ............................... 65 50 65
1971, Dec. 6 ............................... 55 50 55
1972, Nov. 24 .............................. 65 50 65
1974, Jan. 3 ................................ 50 50 50
Note. These regulations, adopted by the Board of adopted effective October 1, 1934; Regulation U, effec­
Governors pursuant to the Securities Exchange Act of tive May 1, 1936; and Regulation X, effective Novem­
1934, limit the amount of credit to purchase and carry ber 1, 1971. The former Regulation G, which was adopted
‘‘margin securities’’ (as defined in the regulations) when effective March 11, 1968, was merged with Regulation U,
such value is collateralized by securities. Margin require­ effective April 1, 1998.
ments on securities are the difference between the market 1. From October 1, 1934, to October 31, 1937, the
value (100 percent) and the maximum loan value of requirement was the margin ‘‘customarily required’’ by
collateral as prescribed by the Board. Regulation T was the brokers and dealers.

Statistical Tables 289
12. Principal Assets and Liabilities of Insured Commercial Banks in the United States,
by Class of Bank, June 30, 2004 and 2003
Millions of dollars, except as noted
Member banks
Nonmember
Item Total
banks
Total National State
2004
Assets
Loans and investments ................... 5,788,749 4,567,717 3,321,077 1,246,640 1,221,031
Loans, gross .......................... 4,267,979 3,381,763 2,481,333 900,430 886,216
Net ................................. 4,266,463 3,380,928 2,480,744 900,183 885,535
Investments ........................... 1,520,770 1,185,955 839,744 346,210 334,815
U.S. Treasury and federal agency
securities ...................... 333,691 212,367 122,046 90,320 121,324
Other ............................... 1,187,079 973,588 717,698 255,890 213,491
Cash assets, total ........................ 271,089 218,068 156,194 61,874 53,021
Liabilities
Deposits, total ........................... 4,454,462 3,413,426 2,442,362 971,063 1,041,036
Interbank ............................. 68,720 54,897 37,078 17,819 13,824
Other transaction ...................... 675,846 487,519 343,929 143,589 188,327
Other nontransaction .................. 3,709,896 2,871,010 2,061,355 809,655 838,886
Equity capital ........................... 721,273 576,917 419,886 157,031 144,356
Number of banks ........................ 7,676 2,885 1,955 930 4,791
2003
Assets
Loans and investments ................... 5,338,735 4,201,136 2,969,072 1,232,064 1,137,599
Loans, gross .......................... 3,922,431 3,105,061 2,225,277 879,784 817,370
Net ................................. 3,920,108 3,103,351 2,223,849 879,502 816,757
Investments ........................... 1,416,304 1,096,075 743,795 352,280 320,229
U.S. Treasury and federal agency
securities ...................... 289,327 186,267 101,918 84,349 103,060
Other ............................... 1,126,977 909,808 641,877 267,931 217,169
Cash assets, total ........................ 301,052 246,847 177,579 69,267 54,205
Liabilities
Deposits, total ........................... 4,206,473 3,240,228 2,292,202 948,026 966,245
Interbank ............................. 67,939 56,239 40,330 15,909 11,699
Other transaction ...................... 684,284 504,700 361,115 143,585 179,585
Other nontransaction .................. 3,454,250 2,679,289 1,890,756 788,533 774,961
Equity capital ........................... 658,407 526,805 371,055 155,750 131,602
Number of banks ........................ 7,813 2,995 2,044 951 4,818
Note. Data are domestic assets and liabilities (except only). Components may not sum to totals because of
for those components reported on a consolidated basis rounding.

290 91st Annual Report, 2004
13A. Reserves of Depository Institutions, Federal Reserve Bank Credit, and Related Items,
Year-End 1984–2004 and Month-End 2004
Millions of dollars
Factors supplying reserve funds
Federal Reserve Bank credit outstanding
Special
Period drawing Treasury
S o e u c h t u r e i r l g i d t h i t e 1 s a R g e re p e u m rc e h n a t s s e 2 Loans Float R F O e e d s th e e r e r v a r e l Total s G to o c ld k c a e r c r i t c g i o f h i u c ts n a t t e s c t u an o rr d u e i t n n ­ c g y 3
assets
1984 ...... 167,612 2,015 3,577 833 12,347 186,384 11,096 4,618 16,418
1985 ...... 186,025 5,223 3,060 988 15,302 210,598 11,090 4,718 17,075
1986 ...... 205,454 16,005 1,565 1,261 17,475 241,760 11,084 5,018 17,567
1987 ...... 226,459 4,961 3,815 811 15,837 251,883 11,078 5,018 18,177
1988 ...... 240,628 6,861 2,170 1,286 18,803 269,748 11,060 5,018 18,799
1989 ...... 233,300 2,117 481 1,093 39,631 276,622 11,059 8,518 19,628
1990 ...... 241,431 18,354 190 2,566 39,880 302,421 11,058 10,018 20,402
1991 ...... 272,531 15,898 218 1,026 34,524 324,197 11,059 10,018 21,014
1992 ...... 300,423 8,094 675 3,350 30,278 342,820 11,056 8,018 21,447
1993 ...... 336,654 13,212 94 963 33,394 384,317 11,053 8,018 22,095
1994 ...... 368,156 10,590 223 740 33,441 413,150 11,051 8,018 22,994
1995 ...... 380,831 13,862 135 231 33,483 428,543 11,050 10,168 24,003
1996 ...... 393,132 21,583 85 5,297 32,222 452,319 11,048 9,718 24,966
1997 ...... 431,420 23,840 2,035 561 32,044 489,901 11,047 9,200 25,543
1998 ...... 452,478 30,376 17 1,009 37,692 521,573 11,046 9,200 26,270
1999 ...... 478,144 140,640 233 407 34,799 654,223 11,048 6,200 28,013
2000 ...... 511,833 43,375 110 795 36,896 593,009 11,046 2,200 31,643
2001 ...... 551,685 50,250 34 698 36,885 639,552 11,045 2,200 33,017
2002 ...... 629,416 39,500 40 832 38,574 708,363 11,043 2,200 34,597
2003 ...... 666,665 43,750 62 211 40,214 750,901 11,043 2,200 35,475
2004 ...... 717,819 33,000 43 927 42,161 793,950 11,045 2,200 36,505
For notes see end of table.

Statistical Tables 291
13A.—Continued
Factors absorbing reserve funds
Reserve
Currency Reverse Treasury Depos o i t t h s e w r i t t h h a n F e r d e e se ra rv l e R b es a e la rv n e c e B s anks, Required R F O e e d s th e e r e r v a r e l b F a e w la d i n e th c ra e l s
in repurchase cash clearing liabilities Reserve
circulation agreements 4 holdings 5 balances and Banks 6
Treasury Foreign Other capital
183,796 0 513 5,316 253 867 1,126 5,952 20,693
197,488 0 550 9,351 480 1,041 1,490 5,940 27,141
211,995 0 447 7,588 287 917 1,812 6,088 46,295
230,205 0 454 5,313 244 1,027 1,687 7,129 40,097
247,649 0 395 8,656 347 548 1,605 7,683 37,742
260,456 0 450 6,217 589 1,298 1,618 8,486 36,713
286,963 0 561 8,960 369 242 1,960 8,147 36,698
307,756 0 636 17,697 968 1,706 3,946 8,113 25,467
334,701 0 508 7,492 206 372 5,897 7,984 26,182
365,271 0 377 14,809 386 397 6,332 9,292 28,619
403,843 0 335 7,161 250 876 4,196 11,959 26,593
424,244 0 270 5,979 386 932 5,167 12,342 24,444
450,648 0 249 7,742 167 892 6,601 13,829 17,923
482,327 0 225 5,444 457 900 6,679 15,500 24,159
517,484 0 85 6,086 167 1,605 6,781 16,354 19,525
628,359 0 109 28,402 71 1,261 7,482 17,256 16,545
593,694 0 450 5,149 216 1,382 6,332 17,962 12,713
643,301 0 425 6,645 61 820 8,525 17,083 8,953
687,518 21,091 367 4,420 136 1,152 10,533 18,977 12,008
724,194 25,652 321 5,723 162 717 11,828 r 19,793 11,230 r
754,948 30,783 270 5,912 80 1,285 9,963 26,378 14,080

292 91st Annual Report, 2004
13A. Reserves of Depository Institutions, Federal Reserve Bank Credit, and Related Items,
Year-End 1984–2004 and Month-End 2004—Continued
Millions of dollars
Factors supplying reserve funds
Federal Reserve Bank credit outstanding
Special
Period drawing Treasury
S o e u c h t u r e i r l g i d t h i t e 1 s a R g e re p e u m rc e h n a t s s e 2 Loans Float R F O e e d s th e e r e r v a r e l Total s G to o c ld k c a e r c r i t c g i o f h i u c ts n a t t e s c t u an o rr d u e i t n n ­ c g y 3
assets
2004
Jan. .... 667,242 23,500 19 −26 41,456 732,191 11,043 2,200 35,567
Feb. ..... 671,583 28,750 23 520 38,754 739,630 11,045 2,200 35,649
Mar. .... 674,084 27,500 64 −586 40,169 741,231 11,045 2,200 35,761
Apr. ..... 677,687 25,250 84 −829 40,345 742,537 11,045 2,200 35,842
May ..... 681,472 30,750 122 −155 38,354 750,543 11,045 2,200 35,924
June ..... 687,391 33,500 323 116 39,465 760,795 11,045 2,200 36,039
July .... 693,727 24,750 260 −23 40,581 759,294 11,044 2,200 36,087
Aug. .... 694,859 32,250 457 1,002 38,043 766,610 11,043 2,200 36,211
Sept. .... 700,341 29,250 236 −25 39,557 769,359 11,043 2,200 36,279
Oct. .... 706,834 25,250 121 −114 41,681 773,772 11,043 2,200 36,364
Nov. .... 712,870 33,750 77 810 39,844 787,351 11,043 2,200 36,435
Dec. .... 717,819 33,000 43 927 42,161 793,950 11,045 2,200 36,505

Statistical Tables 293
13A.—Continued
Factors absorbing reserve funds
Reserve
Deposits with Federal Reserve Banks, Other balances
Currency Reverse Treasury other than reserve balances Required R Fe e d se e r r v a e l Fe w d i e th ra l
in repurchase cash clearing liabilities Reserve
circulation agreements 4 holdings 5 balances and Banks 6
Treasury Foreign Other capital
708,952 20,129 356 4,184 84 426 10,614 20,365 15,889
712,613 21,762 318 6,513 82 302 10,078 20,033 16,823
716,136 21,701 366 5,884 83 231 10,410 20,880 14,545
717,528 21,204 321 6,392 96 368 10,561 20,804 14,350
726,367 20,477 320 4,637 86 267 10,145 21,718 15,696
733,183 19,228 303 6,032 280 226 10,861 21,198 18,767
733,020 20,167 283 4,917 81 304 9,802 21,302 18,751
736,506 22,941 330 2,456 158 275 10,206 23,084 20,109
738,372 25,693 291 5,987 128 243 10,718 23,502 13,946
741,440 27,037 299 5,116 92 310 10,571 23,918 14,597
754,226 28,201 283 3,759 89 326 10,024 25,627 14,494
754,948 30,783 270 5,912 80 1,285 9,963 26,378 14,080
Note. Components may not sum to totals because of fractional and dollar coins. For details see ‘‘Currency and
rounding. Coin in Circulation,’’ Treasury Bulletin.
1. Includes U.S. Treasury and federal agency securi­ 4. Cash value of agreements, which are collateralized
ties. U.S. Treasury securities contain securities lent to by U.S. Treasury securities.
dealers and are fully collateralized by other U.S. Treasury 5. Coin and paper currency held by the Treasury, as
securities. Federal agency securities are included at face well as any gold in excess of the gold certificates issued
value. to the Reserve Bank.
2. Cash value of agreements, which are collateralized 6. Excludes required clearing balances and adjust­
by U.S. Treasury and federal agency securities. ments to compensate for float.
3. Includes currency and coin (other than gold) issued r. Revised.
directly by the Treasury. The largest components are

294 91st Annual Report, 2004
13B. Reserves of Depository Institutions, Federal Reserve Bank Credit, and Related Items,
Year-End 1918–1983
Millions of dollars
Factors supplying reserve funds
Federal Reserve Bank credit outstanding
Special
Period drawing Treasury
S o e u c h t u r e i r l g i d t h i t e 1 s R a c g e h r p a e u s e e r ­ ­ Loans Float 3 ot A he ll r 4 R F O e e d s th e e r e r v a r e l Total s G to o c l k d 6 c a e r c r i t c g i o f h i u c ts n a t t e s c t u an o rr d u e i t n n ­ c g y 7
ments 2 assets 5
1918...... 239 0 1,766 199 294 0 2,498 2,873 . . . 1,795
1919...... 300 0 2,215 201 575 0 3,292 2,707 . . . 1,707
1920...... 287 0 2,687 119 262 0 3,355 2,639 . . . 1,709
1921...... 234 0 1,144 40 146 0 1,563 3,373 . . . 1,842
1922...... 436 0 618 78 273 0 1,405 3,642 . . . 1,958
1923...... 80 54 723 27 355 0 1,238 3,957 . . . 2,009
1924...... 536 4 320 52 390 0 1,302 4,212 . . . 2,025
1925...... 367 8 643 63 378 0 1,459 4,112 . . . 1,977
1926...... 312 3 637 45 384 0 1,381 4,205 . . . 1,991
1927...... 560 57 582 63 393 0 1,655 4,092 . . . 2,006
1928...... 197 31 1,056 24 500 0 1,809 3,854 . . . 2,012
1929...... 488 23 632 34 405 0 1,583 3,997 . . . 2,022
1930...... 686 43 251 21 372 0 1,373 4,306 . . . 2,027
1931...... 775 42 638 20 378 0 1,853 4,173 . . . 2,035
1932...... 1,851 4 235 14 41 0 2,145 4,226 . . . 2,204
1933...... 2,435 2 98 15 137 0 2,688 4,036 . . . 2,303
1934...... 2,430 0 7 5 21 0 2,463 8,238 . . . 2,511
1935...... 2,430 1 5 12 38 0 2,486 10,125 . . . 2,476
1936...... 2,430 0 3 39 28 0 2,500 11,258 . . . 2,532
1937...... 2,564 0 10 19 19 0 2,612 12,760 . . . 2,637
1938...... 2,564 0 4 17 16 0 2,601 14,512 . . . 2,798
1939...... 2,484 0 7 91 11 0 2,593 17,644 . . . 2,963
1940...... 2,184 0 3 80 8 0 2,274 21,995 . . . 3,087
1941...... 2,254 0 3 94 10 0 2,361 22,737 . . . 3,247
1942...... 6,189 0 6 471 14 0 6,679 22,726 . . . 3,648
1943...... 11,543 0 5 681 10 0 12,239 21,938 . . . 4,094
1944...... 18,846 0 80 815 4 0 19,745 20,619 . . . 4,131
1945...... 24,252 0 249 578 2 0 15,091 20,065 . . . 4,339
1946...... 23,350 0 163 580 1 0 24,093 20,529 . . . 4,562
1947...... 22,559 0 85 535 1 0 23,181 22,754 . . . 4,562
1948...... 23,333 0 223 541 1 0 24,097 24,244 . . . 4,589
1949...... 18,885 0 78 534 2 0 19,499 24,427 . . . 4,598
1950...... 20,725 53 67 1,368 3 0 22,216 22,706 . . . 4,636
1951...... 23,605 196 19 1,184 5 0 25,009 22,695 . . . 4,709
1952...... 24,034 663 156 967 4 0 25,825 23,187 . . . 4,812
1953...... 25,318 598 28 935 2 0 26,880 22,030 . . . 4,894
1954...... 24,888 44 143 808 1 0 25,885 21,713 . . . 4,985
1955...... 24,391 394 108 1,585 29 0 26,507 21,690 . . . 5,008
1956...... 24,610 305 50 1,665 70 0 26,699 21,949 . . . 5,066
1957...... 23,719 519 55 1,424 66 0 25,784 22,781 . . . 5,146
1958...... 26,252 95 64 1,296 49 0 27,755 20,534 . . . 5,234
1959...... 26,607 41 458 1,590 75 0 28,771 19,456 . . . 5,311
For notes see end of table.

Statistical Tables 295
13B.—Continued
Factors absorbing reserve funds
Member bank
Deposits with reserves 9
Federal Reserve Banks,
Other
Cur­ other than reserve balances
Other Federal
rency Treasury Required
Federal Reserve
in cash clearing
cir ti c o u n la ­ holdings 8 Treasury Foreign Other a R cc e o s u e n rv ts e 5 balances l c ia a b a p i n i l t i d a t i l e 5 s R F W e e d se i e t r r h v a e l Cu a rr n e d n cy qu R ire e d ­ 11 ces E s x 11 ­ , 12
coin10
Banks
4,951 288 51 96 25 118 0 0 1,636 0 1,585 51
5,091 385 51 73 28 208 0 0 1,890 0 1,822 68
5,325 218 57 5 18 298 0 0 1,781 0 0 0
4,403 214 96 12 15 285 0 0 1,753 0 1,654 99
4,530 225 11 3 26 276 0 0 1,934 0 0 0
4,757 213 38 4 19 275 0 0 1,898 0 1,884 14
4,760 211 51 19 20 258 0 0 2,220 0 2,161 59
4,817 203 16 8 21 272 0 0 2,212 0 2,256 −44
4,808 201 17 46 19 293 0 0 2,194 0 2.250 −56
4,716 208 18 5 21 301 0 0 2,487 0 2,424 63
4,686 202 23 6 21 348 0 0 2,389 0 2,430 −41
4,578 216 29 6 24 393 0 0 2,355 0 2,428 −73
4,603 211 19 6 22 375 0 0 2,471 0 2,375 96
5,360 222 54 79 31 354 0 0 1,961 0 1,994 −33
5,388 272 8 19 24 355 0 0 2,509 0 1,933 576
5,519 284 3 4 128 360 0 0 2,729 0 1,870 859
5,536 3,029 121 20 169 241 0 0 4,096 0 2,282 1,814
5,882 2,566 544 29 226 253 0 0 5,587 0 2,743 2,844
6,543 2,376 244 99 160 261 0 0 6,606 0 4,622 1,984
6,550 3,619 142 172 235 263 0 0 7,027 0 5,815 1,212
6,856 2,706 923 199 242 260 0 0 8,724 0 5,519 3,205
7,598 2,409 634 397 256 251 0 0 11,653 0 6,444 5,209
8,732 2,213 368 1,133 599 284 0 0 4,026 0 7,411 6,615
11,160 2,215 867 774 586 291 0 0 12,450 0 9,365 3,085
15,410 2,193 799 793 485 256 0 0 13,117 0 11,129 1,988
20,499 2,303 579 1,360 356 339 0 0 12,886 0 11,650 1,236
25,307 2,375 440 1,204 394 402 0 0 14,373 0 12,748 1,625
28,515 2,287 977 862 446 495 0 0 15,915 0 14,457 1,458
28,952 2,272 393 508 314 607 0 0 16,139 0 15,577 562
28,868 1,336 870 392 569 563 0 0 17,899 0 16,400 1,499
28,224 1,325 1,123 642 547 590 0 0 20,479 0 19,277 1,202
27,600 1,312 821 767 750 106 0 0 16,568 0 15,550 1,018
27,741 1,293 668 895 565 714 0 0 17,681 0 16,509 1,172
29,206 1,270 247 526 363 746 0 0 20,056 0 19,667 389
30,433 1,270 389 550 455 777 0 0 19,950 0 20,520 −570
30,781 761 346 423 493 839 0 0 20,160 0 19,397 763
30,509 796 563 490 441 907 0 0 18,876 0 18,618 258
31,158 767 394 402 554 925 0 0 19,005 0 18,903 102
31,790 775 441 322 426 901 0 0 19,059 0 19,089 −30
31,834 761 481 356 246 998 0 0 19,034 0 19,091 −57
32,193 683 358 272 391 1,122 0 0 18,504 0 18,574 −70
32,591 391 504 345 694 841 0 0 18,174 310 18,619 −135

296 91st Annual Report, 2004
13B. Reserves of Depository Institutions, Federal Reserve Bank Credit, and Related Items,
Year-End 1918–1983—Continued
Millions of dollars
Factors supplying reserve funds
Federal Reserve Bank credit outstanding
Special
Period drawing Treasury
S o e u c h t u r e i r l g i d t h i t e 1 s R a c g e h r p a e u s e e r ­ ­ Loans Float 3 ot A he ll r 4 R F O e e d s th e e r e r v a r e l Total s G to o c l k d 6 c a e r c r i t c g i o f h i u c ts n a t t e s c t u an o rr d u e i t n n ­ c g y 7
ments 2 assets 5
1960...... 26,984 400 33 1,847 74 0 29,338 17,767 . . . 5,398
1961...... 30,478 159 130 2,300 51 0 31,362 16,889 . . . 5,585
1962...... 28,722 342 38 2,903 110 0 33,871 15,978 . . . 5,567
1963...... 33,582 11 63 2,600 162 0 36,418 15,513 . . . 5,578
1964...... 36,506 538 186 2,606 94 0 39,930 15,388 . . . 5,405
1965...... 40,478 290 137 2,248 187 0 43,340 13,733 . . . 5,575
1966...... 43,655 661 173 2,495 193 0 47,177 13,159 . . . 6,317
1967...... 48,980 170 141 2,576 164 0 52,031 11,982 . . . 6,784
1968...... 52,937 0 186 3,443 58 0 56,624 10,367 . . . 6,795
1969...... 57,154 0 183 3,440 64 2,743 64,584 10,367 . . . 6,852
1970...... 62,142 0 335 4,261 57 1,123 67,918 10,732 400 7,147
1971...... 69,481 1,323 39 4,343 261 1,068 76,515 10,132 400 7,710
1972...... 71,119 111 1,981 3,974 106 1,260 78,551 10,410 400 8,313
1973...... 80,395 100 1,258 3,099 68 1,152 86,072 11,567 400 8,716
1974...... 84,760 954 299 2,001 999 3,195 92,208 11,652 400 9,253
1975...... 92,789 1,335 211 3,688 1,126 3,312 102,461 11,599 500 10,218
1976...... 100,062 4,031 25 2,601 991 3,182 110,892 11,598 1,200 10,810
1977...... 108,922 2,352 265 3,810 954 2,442 118,745 11,718 1,250 11,331
1978...... 117,374 1,217 1,174 6,432 587 4,543 131,327 11,671 1,300 11,831
1979...... 124,507 1,660 1,454 6,767 704 5,613 140,705 11,172 1,800 13,083
1980...... 128,038 2,554 1,809 4,467 776 8,739 146,383 11,160 2,518 13,427
1981...... 136,863 3,485 1,601 1,762 195 9,230 153,136 11,151 3,318 13,687
1982...... 144,544 4,293 717 2,735 1,480 9,890 63,659 11,148 4,618 13,786
1983...... 159,203 1,592 918 1,605 418 8,728 172,464 11,121 4,618 15,732
Note. For a description of figures and discussion of 4. Principally acceptances and, until August 21, 1959,
their significance, see Banking and Monetary Statistics, industrial loans, the authority for which expired on that
1941–1970 (Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve date.
System, 1976), pp. 507–23. 5. For the period before April 16, 1969, includes the
Components may not sum to totals because of total of Federal Reserve capital paid in, surplus, other
rounding. capital accounts, and other liabilities and accrued divi­
1. In 1969 and thereafter, includes securities loaned— dends, less the sum of bank premises and other assets,
fully guaranteed by U.S. government securities pledged and is reported as ‘‘Other Federal Reserve accounts’’ ;
with Federal Reserve Banks—and excludes securities thereafter, ‘‘Other Federal Reserve assets’’ and ‘‘Other
sold and scheduled to be bought back under matched Federal Reserve liabilities and capital’’ are shown
sale–purchase transactions. On September 29, 1971, and separately.
thereafter, includes federal agency issues bought outright. 6. Before January 30, 1934, includes gold held in
2. On December 1, 1966, and thereafter, includes Federal Reserve Banks and in circulation.
federal agency obligations held under repurchase 7. Includes currency and coin (other than gold) issued
agreements. directly by the Treasury. The largest components are
3. In 1960 and thereafter, figures reflect a minor fractional and dollar coins. For details see ‘‘Currency and
change in concept; see Federal Reserve Bulletin, vol. 47 Coin in Circulation,’’ Treasury Bulletin.
(February 1961), p. 164.

Statistical Tables 297
13B.—Continued
Factors absorbing reserve funds
Member bank
Deposits with reserves 9
Federal Reserve Banks,
Cur­ Other
other than reserve balances
rency Other Federal
Treasury Required
in Federal Reserve
cash clearing
c c u i l r a ­ ­ holdings 8 a R cc e o s u e n rv ts e 5 balances liab a i n li d t ies F W ed i e t r h a l Currency Re­ Ex­
tion Treasury Foreign Other capital 5 Reserve and quired11 cess11, 12
coin10
Banks
32,869 377 485 217 533 941 0 0 17,081 2,544 18,988 637
33,918 422 465 279 320 1,044 0 0 17,387 2,544 18,988 96
35,338 380 597 247 393 1,007 0 0 17,454 3,262 20,071 645
37,692 361 880 171 291 1,065 0 0 17,049 4,099 20,677 471
39,619 612 820 229 321 1,036 0 0 18,086 4,151 21,663 574
42,056 760 668 150 355 211 0 0 18,447 4,163 22,848 −238
44,663 1,176 416 174 588 −147 0 0 19,779 4,310 24,321 −232
47,226 1,344 1,123 135 563 −773 0 0 21,092 4,631 25,905 −182
50,961 695 703 216 747 −1,353 0 0 21,818 4,921 27,439 −700
53,950 596 1,312 134 807 0 0 1,919 22,085 5,187 28,173 −901
57,903 431 1,156 148 1,233 0 0 1,986 24,150 5,423 30,033 −460
61,068 460 2,020 294 999 0 0 2,131 27,788 5,743 32,496 1,035
66,516 345 1,855 325 840 0 0 2,143 25,647 6,216 32,044 98 12
72,497 317 2,542 251 1,419 13 0 0 2,669 27,060 6,781 35,268 −1,360
79,743 185 2,113 418 1,275 13 0 0 2,935 25,843 7,370 37,011 −3,798
86,547 483 7,285 353 1,090 0 0 2,968 26,052 8,036 35,197 −1,103 14
93,717 460 10,393 352 1,357 0 0 3,063 25,158 8,628 35,461 −1,535
103,811 392 7,114 379 1,187 0 0 3,292 26,870 9,421 37,615 −1,265
114,645 240 4,196 368 1,256 0 0 4,275 31,152 10,538 42,694 −893
125,600 494 4,075 429 1,412 0 0 4,957 29,792 11,429 44,217 −2,835
136,829 441 3,062 411 617 0 0 4,671 27,456 13,654 40,558 675
144,774 443 4,301 505 781 0 117 5,261 25,111 15,576 42,145 −1,442
154,908 429 5,033 328 1,033 0 436 4,990 26,053 16,666 41,391 1,328
171,935 479 3,661 191 851 0 1,013 5,392 20,413 17,821 39,179 −945
8. Coin and paper currency held by the Treasury, as 1973—Q1, $279; Q2, $172; Q3, $112; Q4, $84;
well as any gold in excess of the gold certificates issued 1974—Q1, $67; Q2, $58. The transition period ended
to the Reserve Bank. with the second quarter of 1974.
9. In November 1979 and thereafter, includes reserves 13. For the period before July 1973, includes certain
of member banks, Edge Act corporations, and U.S. agen­ deposits of domestic nonmember banks and foreign-
cies and branches of foreign banks. On November 13, owned banking institutions held with member banks and
1980, and thereafter, includes reserves of all depository redeposited in full with Federal Reserve Banks in con­
institutions. nection with voluntary participation by nonmember insti­
10. Between December 1, 1959, and November 23, tutions in the Federal Reserve System program of credit
1960, part was allowed as reserves; thereafter, all was restraint.
allowed. As of December 12, 1974, the amount of voluntary
11. Estimated through 1958. Before 1929, data were nonmember bank and foreign-agency and branch deposits
available only on call dates (in 1920 and 1922 the call at Federal Reserve Banks that are associated with
date was December 29). Since September 12, 1968, the marginal reserves is no longer reported. However, two
amount has been based on close-of-business figures for amounts are reported: (1) deposits voluntarily held as
the reserve period two weeks before the report date. reserves by agencies and branches of foreign banks oper­
12. For the week ending November 15, 1972, and ating in the United States and (2) Eurodollar liabilities.
thereafter, includes $450 million of reserve deficiencies 14. Adjusted to include waivers of penalties for reserve
on which Federal Reserve Banks are allowed to waive deficiencies, in accordance with change in Board policy,
penalties for a transition period in connection with bank effective November 19, 1975.
adaptation to Regulation J as amended, effective Novem­ . . . Not applicable.
ber 9, 1972. Allowable deficiencies are as follows (begin­
ning with first statement week of quarter, in millions) :

298 91st Annual Report, 2004
14. Banking Offices and Banks Affiliated with Bank Holding Companies (BHCs) in the
United States, December 31, 2003 and 2004
Commercial banks 1
State-
chartered
Type of office Total Member
savings
Total Nonmember banks
Total National State
All banking offices
Banks
Number, Dec. 31, 2003 .. 8,116 7,725 2,892 1,963 929 4,833 391
Changes during 2004
New banks .............. 131 126 29 19 10 97 5
Banks converted
into branches ....... −248 −236 −121 −79 −42 −115 −12
Ceased banking
operation2 .......... −39 −27 −16 −13 −3 −11 −12
Other 3 .................. 0 −2 10 − 10 20 −12 2
Net change ........... −156 −139 −98 −83 −15 −41 −17
Number, Dec. 31, 2004 .. 7,960 7,586 2,794 1,880 914 4,792 374
Branches and
Additional Offices
Number, Dec. 31, 2003 .. 72,936 69,440 50,628 36,553 14,075 18,812 3,496
Changes during 2004
New branches ........... 2,190 2,078 1,535 1,124 411 543 112
Branches converted
from banks ......... 248 241 138 99 39 103 7
Discontinued 2 ........... −883 −666 −437 −295 −142 −229 −217
Other 3 .................. 0 81 0 1,202 −1,202 81 −81
Net change ............ 1,555 1,734 1,236 2,130 −894 498 −179
Number, Dec. 31, 2004 .. 74,491 71,174 51,864 38,683 13,181 19,310 3,317
Banks affiliated with BHCs
Banks
Number, Dec. 31, 2003 .. 6,403 6,287 2,486 1,672 814 3,801 116
Changes during 2004
BHC-affiliated
new banks .......... 171 159 47 33 14 112 12
Banks converted
into branches ....... −201 −196 −107 −70 −37 −89 −5
Ceased banking
operation 2 .......... −40 −30 −17 −16 −1 −13 −10
Other 3 .................. 0 −2 9 −6 15 −1 1 2
Net change ........... −70 −69 −68 −59 −9 −1 −1
Number, Dec. 31, 2004 .. 6,333 6,218 2,418 1,613 805 3,800 115
1. For purposes of this table, banks are entities that defined as an insured bank in section 3(h) of the FDIC
are defined as banks in the Bank Holding Company Act, Act. Covers entities in the United States and its territories
as amended, which is implemented by Federal Reserve and possessions (affiliated insular areas).
Regulation Y. Generally, a bank is any institution that 2. Institutions that no longer meet the Regulation Y
accepts demand deposits and is engaged in the business definition of bank.
of making commercial loans or any institution that is 3. Interclass changes and sales of branches.

Federal Reserve System Audits

301
Audits of the Federal Reserve System
The Board of Governors, the Federal by an independent outside auditor. In
Reserve Banks, and the Federal Reserve addition, the Reserve Banks are subject
System as a whole are all subject to to annual examination by the Board.
several levels of audit and review. The As discussed in the chapter ‘‘Federal
Board’s financial statements, and its Reserve Banks,’’ the Board’s examina­
compliance with laws and regulations tion includes a wide range of ongoing
affecting those statements, are audited oversight activities conducted on and off
annually by an outside auditor retained site by staff of the Board’s Division of
by the Board’s Office of Inspector Gen­ Reserve Bank Operations and Payment
eral. The Office of Inspector General Systems.
also audits and investigates the Board’s Federal Reserve operations are also
programs and operations, as well as subject to review by the Government
those Board functions delegated to the Accountability Office.
Reserve Banks.
The financial statements of the
Reserve Banks are also audited annually

303
Board of Governors Financial Statements
The financial statements of the Board for 2004 and 2003 were audited
by KPMG LLP, independent auditors.
KPMG LLP
2001 M Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Independent Auditors’ Report on Financial Statements
To the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:
We have audited the accompanying balance sheets of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve
System (the Board) as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, and the related statements of revenues and
expenses and changes in cumulative results of operations, and cash flows for the years then ended. These
financial statements are the responsibility of the Board’s management. Our responsibility is to express an
opinion on these financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally accepted in the United States of
America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in the Government Auditing Standards,
issued by the Comptroller General of the United States. Those standards require that we plan and perform
the audits to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the financial statements are free of material
misstatement. Our audit included consideration of internal control over financial reporting as a basis for
designing audit procedures that are appropriate in the circumstances, but not for the purpose of expressing
an opinion on the effectiveness of the Board’s internal control over financial reporting. Accordingly, we
express no such opinion. An audit includes examining, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts
and disclosures in the financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles used
and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the overall financial statement
presentation. We believe that our audits provide a reasonable basis for our opinion.
In our opinion, the financial statements referred to above present fairly, in all material respects, the
financial position of the Board at December 31, 2004 and 2003, and the results of its operations, and its
cash flows for the years then ended, in conformity with accounting principles generally accepted in the
United States of America.
In accordance with Government Auditing Standards, we have also issued our reports dated April 1, 2005,
on our consideration of the Board’s internal control over financial reporting and its compliance with certain
provisions of laws, regulations, and contracts. The purpose of those reports is to describe the scope of our
testing of internal control over financial reporting and compliance and the results of that testing, and not to
provide an opinion on the internal control over financial reporting or on compliance. Those reports are an
integral part of an audit conducted in accordance with Government Auditing Standards, and should be read
in conjunction with this report in considering the results of our audit.
April 1, 2005
KPMG LLP, a U.S. limited liability partnership, is the U.S.
member firm of KPMG International, a Swiss cooperative.

304 91st Annual Report, 2004
BOARDOFGOVERNORSOFTHEFEDERALRESERVESYSTEM
BALANCESHEETS
AsofDecember31,
2004 2003
Assets
Current Assets
Cash ..................................................................... $ 60,107,292 $ 56,179,654
Accountsreceivable ....................................................... 1,696,480 1,251,117
Prepaidexpensesandotherassets .......................................... 4,015,067 2,614,354
Totalcurrentassets ................................................. 65,818,839 60,045,125
Noncurrent Assets
Propertyandequipment,net(Note2) ....................................... 149,028,686 149,595,059
Collections(Note1) .......................................................
Totalnoncurrentassets ............................................. 149,028,686 149,595,059
Totalassets ........................................................ $214,847,525 $209,640,184
Liabilities and Cumulative Results of Operations
Current Liabilities
Accountspayableandaccruedliabilities .................................... $ 13,891,861 $ 15,347,390
Accruedpayrollandrelatedtaxes .......................................... 4,552,039 5,056,647
Accruedannualleave...................................................... 14,195,910 13,428,993
Capitalleasepayable(currentportion) ...................................... 250,794 206,590
Unearnedrevenuesandotherliabilities ..................................... 467,664 390,698
Totalcurrentliabilities ............................................. 33,358,268 34,430,318
Long-term Liabilities
Capitalleasepayable(non-currentportion) ................................. 675,271 763,699
Accumulatedretirementbenefitobligation(Note3) ......................... 594,169 595,601
Accumulatedpostretirementbenefitobligation(Note4) ...................... 5,789,566 5,322,053
Accumulatedpostemploymentbenefitobligation(Note5) ................... 5,308,565 4,949,892
Totallong-termliabilities ........................................... 12,367,571 11,631,245
Totalliabilities ..................................................... 45,725,839 46,061,563
Cumulative Results of Operations
Workingcapital ........................................................... 32,711,365 25,821,397
Unfundedlong-termliabilities ............................................. (11,692,300) (10,867,546)
Netinvestmentinpropertyandequipment .................................. 148,102,621 148,624,770
Totalcumulativeresultsofoperations ............................... 169,121,686 163,578,621
Totalliabilitiesandcumulativeresultsofoperations .................. $214,847,525 $209,640,184
Seeaccompanyingnotestofinancialstatements.

Board of Governors Financial Statements 305
BOARDOFGOVERNORSOFTHEFEDERALRESERVESYSTEM
STATEMENTSOFREVENUESANDEXPENSES
ANDCHANGESINCUMULATIVERESULTSOFOPERATIONS
FortheyearsendedDecember31,
2004 2003
Board Operating Revenues
AssessmentsleviedonFederalReserveBanksforBoard
operatingexpensesandcapitalexpenditures......................... $272,331,500 $297,020,200
Otherrevenues(Note6)................................................ 8,336,581 8,835,440
Totaloperatingrevenues ........................................ 280,668,081 305,855,640
Board Operating Expenses
Salaries............................................................... 166,797,724 156,547,392
Retirementandinsurancecontributions.................................. 30,850,441 28,263,776
Contractualservicesandprofessionalfees............................... 24,835,904 17,501,035
Depreciationandnetlossesondisposals................................. 12,445,708 12,194,612
Utilities............................................................... 8,273,801 7,664,716
Travel ................................................................ 7,088,444 5,981,254
Software.............................................................. 6,302,695 5,910,128
Postageandsupplies................................................... 6,116,355 8,175,120
Repairsandmaintenance............................................... 3,954,263 4,029,441
Printingandbinding................................................... 1,944,552 1,864,006
Otherexpenses(Note6)................................................ 6,515,129 6,642,118
Totaloperatingexpenses........................................ 275,125,016 254,773,598
Results of Operations ................................................. 5,543,065 51,082,042
Issuance and Redemption of Federal Reserve Notes
AssessmentsleviedonFederalReserveBanks
forcurrencycosts................................................. 503,784,304 508,144,248
Expensesforcurrencyprinting,issuance,
retirement,andshipping .......................................... 503,784,304 508,144,248
Currency Assessments over (under) Expenses ......................... 0 0
Total Results of Operations .......................................... 5,543,065 51,082,042
Cumulative Results of Operations, Beginningofyear.................. 163,578,621 112,496,579
Cumulative Results of Operations, Endofyear........................ $169,121,686 $163,578,621
Seeaccompanyingnotestofinancialstatements.

306 91st Annual Report, 2004
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
STATEMENTS OF CASH FLOWS
For the years ended December 31,
2004 2003
Cash Flows from Operating Activities
Results of Operations .................................................... $ 5,543,065 $51,082,042
Adjustments to reconcile results of operations
to net cash provided by (used in) operating activities:
Depreciation and net losses on disposals ................................. 12,445,708 12,194,612
Increase in assets:
Accounts receivable, prepaid expenses, and other assets ................ (1,846,076) (2,192,814)
Increase (decrease) in liabilities:
Accounts payable and accrued liabilities .............................. (1,455,529) 3,897,291
Accrued payroll and related taxes ..................................... (504,608) (3,046,063)
Accrued annual leave ................................................ 766,917 1,555,466
Unearned revenues and other liabilities ............................... 76,966 (51,368)
Accumulated retirement benefit obligation ............................ (1,432) (18,507)
Accumulated postretirement benefit obligation ........................ 467,513 404,266
Accumulated postemployment benefit obligation ...................... 358,673 650,640
Net cash provided by operating activities ........................... 15,851,197 64,475,565
Cash Flows from Investing Activities
Proceeds from disposals .................................................. 4,005 15,790
Capital expenditures ...................................................... (11,715,861) (16,809,964)
Net cash used in investing activities ................................ (11,711,856) (16,794,174)
Cash Flows from Financing Activities
Capital lease payments ................................................... (211,703) (136,901)
Net cash used in financing activities ................................ (211,703) (136,901)
Net Increase in Cash ..................................................... 3,927,638 47,544,490
Cash Balance, Beginning of year .......................................... 56,179,654 8,635,164
Cash Balance, End of year ................................................ $60,107,292 $ 56,179,654
Supplemental Disclosure of Cash Flow Information
Capital lease obligations incurred ......................................... $ 190,538 $ 1,024,491
See accompanying notes to financial statements.

Board of Governors Financial Statements 307
BOARD OF GOVERNORS OF THE FEDERAL RESERVE SYSTEM
NOTES TO FINANCIAL STATEMENTS purchased and donated collection items are not recorded.
AS OF AND FOR THE YEARS ENDED The value of the Board’s collections has not been
DECEMBER 31, 2004 AND 2003 determined.
Estimates—The preparation of financial statements in
conformity with accounting principles generally accepted
(1) Significant Accounting Policies
in the United States of America requires management to
Organization—The Federal Reserve System was estab­ make estimates and assumptions that affect the reported
lished by Congress in 1913 and consists of the Board of amounts of assets and liabilities and the disclosure of
Governors (Board), the Federal Open Market Committee, contingent assets and liabilities at the date of the financial
the twelve regional Federal Reserve Banks, the Federal statements and the reported amounts of revenues and
Advisory Council, and the private commercial banks that expenses during the reporting period. Actual results could
are members of the System. The Board, unlike the differ from those estimates.
Reserve Banks, was established as a federal government Reclassifications—Certain 2003 amounts have been
agency and is supported by Washington staff numbering reclassified to conform with the 2004 presentation.
approximately 1,800, as it carries out its responsibilities
in conjunction with other components of the Federal (2) Property and Equipment
Reserve System. The following is a summary of the components of the
The Board is required by the Federal Reserve Act to Board’s property and equipment, at cost, net of accumu­
report its operations to the Speaker of the House of lated depreciation.
Representatives. The Act also requires the Board, each
year, to order a financial audit of each Federal Reserve As of December 31,
Bank and to publish each week a statement of the finan­
cial condition of each such Reserve Bank and a consoli­ 2004 2003
Land ................. $ 18,640,314 $ 18,640,314
dated statement for all of the Reserve Banks. Accord­
Buildings and
ingly, the Board believes that the best financial disclosure
improvements . . . 132,891,551 129,161,957
consistent with law is achieved by issuing separate finan­
Furniture and
cial statements for the Board and for the Reserve Banks.
equipment ....... 44,450,522 43,890,215
Therefore, the accompanying financial statements include Software ............. 12,207,125 11,425,411
only the operations and activities of the Board. Combined Construction in
financial statements for the Federal Reserve Banks are process .......... 4,380,259 0
included in the Board’s annual report to the Speaker of 212,569,771 203,117,897
the House of Representatives. Less accumulated
Basis of Accounting—The financial statements have depreciation ..... (63,541,085) (53,522,838)
been prepared on the accrual basis of accounting. Property and
Revenues—Assessments for operating expenses and equipment, net . . . $149,028,686 $149,595,059
additions to property are based on expected cash needs.
Amounts over or under assessed due to differences Furniture and equipment includes $1,230,000 and
between actual and expected cash needs flow in to or out $1,156,000 for capitalized leases as of December 31,
of ‘‘Cumulative Results of Operations’’ during the year. 2004 and 2003, respectively. Accumulated depreciation
Issuance and Redemption of Federal Reserve Notes— includes $356,000 and $195,000 for capitalized leases as
The Board incurs expenses and assesses the Federal of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. The Board
Reserve Banks for currency printing, issuance, retire­ paid interest related to these capital leases in the amount
ment, and shipping of Federal Reserve Notes. These of $104,000 and $76,000 for 2004 and 2003, respectively.
assessments and expenses are separately reported in the The future minimum lease payments required under
statements of revenues and expenses because they are not the capital leases and the present value of the net mini­
Board operating transactions. mum lease payments as of December 31, 2004, are as
Property and Equipment—The Board’s property, build­ follows:
ings, and equipment are stated at cost less accumulated
depreciation. Depreciation is calculated on a straight-line
basis over the estimated useful lives of the assets, which
range from 3 to 10 years for furniture and equipment and
from 10 to 50 years for building equipment and struc­
tures. Upon the sale or other disposition of a depreciable
asset, the cost and related accumulated depreciation are
removed from the accounts and any gain or loss is
recognized.
Collections—The Board has collections of works of
art, historical treasures, and similar assets. These collec­
tions are maintained and held for public exhibition in
furtherance of public service. Proceeds from any sales of
collections are used to acquire other items for collections.
As permitted by FAS 116, the cost of collections pur­
chased by the Board is charged to expense in the year

308 91st Annual Report, 2004
Year for future payments to retirees under these programs, and
ending it is not accountable for the assets of the plans.
December 31 Amount Employees of the Board may also participate in the
2005 $ 427,659 Federal Reserve System’s Thrift Plan. Under the Thrift
2006 416,274 Plan, members may contribute up to a fixed percentage
2007 416,274 of their salary. Board contributions are based upon a
2008 138,279 fixed percentage of each member’s basic contribution
Total minimum lease and were $8,314,000 and $7,692,000 in 2004 and 2003,
payments ............. 1,398,486 respectively.
Less: Amount representing Effective January 1, 1996, Board employees covered
maintenance included under the System Plan are also covered under a Benefits
in total amounts above . (301,512) Equalization Plan (BEP). Benefits paid under the BEP are
Net minimum lease limited to those benefits that cannot be paid from the
payments ............. 1,096,974 System Plan due to limitations imposed by Sec­
Less: Amount representing
tions 401(a)(17), 415(b) and 415(e) of the Internal Reve­
interest ............... (170,909)
nue Code of 1986. Pension costs attributed to the System
Present value of net
Plan reduce the pension costs of the BEP. Activity for the
minimum lease
payments ............. 926,065 BEP for 2004 and 2003 is summarized in the following
Less: Current maturities table:
of capital lease
obligations ............ (250,794) 2004 2003
Long-term capital lease Change in projected
obligations ............ $ 675,271 benefit obligation
Benefit obligation at
beginning of year . . $ 74,956 $ 12,866
Construction in process includes costs incurred in 2004 Service cost ............ 23,239 13,689
for two long-term security projects. The first, the Elec­ Interest cost ............ 6,170 3,412
tronic Security System, has an estimated cost of $5.1 mil­ Plan participants’
lion and expected completion in 2005. The second, the contributions ...... 0 0
Plan amendments ....... 0 0
Security Perimeter Barrier Project, has an estimated cost
Actuarial (gain)/loss .... 36,588 44,989
of $11.8 million and expected completion in 2006. Benefits paid ........... 0 0
(3) Retirement Benefits Benefit obligation at
end of year ........ $ 140,953 $ 74,956
Substantially all of the Board’s employees participate
in the Retirement Plan for Employees of the Federal
Reserve System (System Plan). The System Plan is a Change in plan assets
Fair value of plan assets
multi-employer plan which covers employees of the Fed­
at beginning
eral Reserve Banks, the Board, and the Plan Administra­ of year ............ $ 0 $ 0
tive Office. Actual return on plan
Employees of the Board who became employed prior assets ............. 0 0
to 1984 are covered by a contributory defined benefits Employer contributions . 0 0
program under the System Plan. Employees of the Board Plan participants’
who became employed after 1983 are covered by a non­ contributions ...... 0 0
Benefits paid ........... 0 0
contributory defined benefits program under the System
Fair value of plan assets
Plan. Contributions to the System Plan are actuarially at end of year ...... $ 0 $ 0
determined and funded by participating employers at
amounts prescribed by the System Plan’s administrator.
Based on actuarial calculations, it was determined that Reconciliation of funded
employer funding contributions were not required for the status at end of year
Funded status .......... $ (140,953) $ (74,956)
years 2004 and 2003, and the Board was not assessed
Unrecognized net
a contribution for these years. Excess Plan assets are actuarial (gain)/
expected to continue to fund future years’ contributions. loss ............... (177,773) (231,189)
Because the plan is part of a multi-employer plan, infor­ Unrecognized prior
mation as to vested and nonvested benefits, as well as service cost ........ (817,732) (934,339)
plan assets, as it relates solely to the Board, is not readily Unrecognized net
available. transition
obligation ......... 542,289 644,883
A relatively small number of Board employees partici­
Retirement
pate in the Civil Service Retirement System (CSRS) or benefit liability .... $ (594,169) $ (595,601)
the Federal Employees’ Retirement System (FERS). The
Board matches employee contributions to these plans.
These defined benefit plans are administered by the
Office of Personnel Management. The Board’s contribu­
tions to these plans totaled $330,000 and $312,000 in
2004 and 2003, respectively. The Board has no liability

Board of Governors Financial Statements 309
2004 2003 2004 2003
Information for pension Change in plan assets
plans with an Fair value of plan
accumulated benefit assets at beginning
obligation in excess of of year ............ $ 0 $ 0
plan asset: Actual return on
Projected benefit plan assets ......... 0 0
obligation ......... $ 140,953 $ 74,956 Employer contribution . . 253,717 227,202
Accumulated benefit Plan participants’
obligation ......... 33 28 contributions ...... 0 0
Benefits paid ........... (253,717) (227,202)
Weighted-average Fair value of plan
assumptions used to assets at end
determine benefit of year ............ $ 0 $ 0
obligation as of
December 31 Reconciliation of
Discount rate ........... 5.75% 6.25% funded status
Rate of compensation at end of year
increase ........... 4.25% 4.00% Funded status .......... $(8,404,551) $(7,166,146)
Unrecognized net
Components of net actuarial
periodic benefit cost (gain)/loss ......... 2,537,211 1,760,246
Service cost—benefits Unrecognized prior
earned during the service cost ........ 77,774 83,847
period ............. $ 23,239 $ 13,689 Prepaid/(accrued)
Interest cost on postretirement
projected benefit benefit liability .... $(5,789,566) $(5,322,053)
obligation ......... 6,170 3,412
Expected return Components of net
on plan assets ...... 0 0 periodic cost
Amortization of for year
prior service cost . . (116,607) (116,607) Service cost ............ $ 203,229 $ 170,636
Amortization of Interest cost ............ 443,043 414,319
(gains)/losses ...... (16,828) (21,595) Amortization of prior
Amortization of initial service cost ........ 6,073 6,073
(asset)/obligation . . 102,594 102,594 Amortization of
Net periodic benefit (gains)/losses ...... 68,885 40,440
cost (credit) ....... $ (1,432) $ (18,507) Total net periodic
cost ............... $ 721,230 $ 631,468
Weighted-average
assumptions used to The liability and costs for the postretirement benefit
determine net periodic
benefit cost for years plan were determined using discount rates of 5.75 percent
ended December 31 and 6.25 percent as of December 31, 2004 and 2003,
Discount rate ........... 6.25% 6.75% respectively. Unrecognized losses of $2,537,211 and
Rate of compensation $1,760,246 as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, respec­
increase ........... 4.00% 4.25% tively, result from changes in the discount rate used to
measure the liabilities. Under Statement of Financial
Accounting Standards No. 106, Employers’ Accounting
(4) Postretirement Benefits
for Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions, the
The Board provides certain life insurance programs for Board may have to record some of these unrecognized
its active employees and retirees. Activity for 2004 and losses in operations in future years. The assumed salary
2003 is summarized in the following table: trend rate for measuring the increase in postretirement
benefits related to life insurance was an average of
2004 2003
4.25 percent.
Change in benefit The above accumulated postretirement benefit obliga­
obligation tion is related to the Board sponsored life insurance
Benefit obligation at programs. The Board has no liability for future payments
beginning of year . . $ 7,166,146 $ 6,134,395 to employees who continue coverage under the federally
Service cost ............ 203,229 170,636
sponsored life and health programs upon retiring. Contri­
Interest cost ............ 443,043 414,319
Plan participants’ butions for active employees participating in federally
contributions ...... 0 0 sponsored health programs totaled $8,223,000 and
Plan amendments ....... 0 0 $7,188,000 in 2004 and 2003, respectively.
Actuarial (gain)/loss .... 845,851 673,998
Benefits paid ........... (253,717) (227,202)
Benefit obligation
at end of year ...... $ 8,404,552 $ 7,166,146

310 91st Annual Report, 2004
(5) Postemployment Benefit Plan (7) Commitments
The Board provides certain postemployment benefits The Board has entered into several operating leases to
to eligible former or inactive employees and their depen­ secure office, training and warehouse space for remaining
dents during the period subsequent to employment but periods ranging from one to four years. In addition, the
prior to retirement. Costs were projected using the same Board has entered into an agreement with the Federal
discount rates as were used for projecting postretirement Deposit Insurance Corporation and the Office of the
costs. The accrued postemployment benefit costs recog­ Comptroller of the Currency, through the Federal Finan­
nized by the Board for the years ended December 31, cial Institutions Examination Council (the ‘‘Council’’)to
2004 and 2003, were $733,000 and $957,000, fund a portion of enhancements for a central data reposi­
respectively. tory project through 2013.
Mimimum annual payments under the operating leases
(6) Other Revenues and Other Expenses having an initial or remaining noncancelable lease term in
The following are summaries of the components of excess of one year at December 31, 2004, are as follows:
Other Revenues and Other Expenses.
2005 ................................. $163,363
As of December 31, 2006 ................................. 71,991
After 2006 ........................... 0
2004 2003
Other revenues $235,354
Data processing
revenue ......... $3,984,610 $4,639,084 Rental expenses under the operating leases were
Rent ................. 2,332,089 2,029,514
$156,000 in 2004 and 2003.
Subscription
revenue ......... 787,053 799,356
(8) Federal Financial Institutions
Reimbursable Examination Council
services to
other agencies . . . 673,730 588,894 The Board is one of the five member agencies of
National Information the Council, and currently performs certain management
Center .......... 15,422 24,422 functions for the Council. The five agencies which are
Board sponsored represented on the Council are the Board, Federal Deposit
conferences ..... 0 275,110 Insurance Corporation, National Credit Union Adminis­
Miscellaneous ........ 543,677 479,060 tration, Office of the Comptroller of the Currency, and
Total other Office of Thrift Supervision. The Board’s financial state­
revenues ........ $8,336,581 $8,835,440 ments do not include financial data for the Council.
Activity related to the Board and Council for 2004 and
2003 is summarized in the following table:
Other expenses
Tuition, registration, 2004 2003
and membership
fees ............. $2,048,610 $1,615,074 Board paid to the
Contingency Council:
operations ....... 782,052 704,699 Assessments for
Public transportation operating expenses
of the Council ...... $ 112,020 $ 105,920
subsidy ......... 800,724 732,124
Central Data
Subsidies and
Repository ......... 326,640 630,000
contributions .... 635,336 627,854 Uniform Bank
Administrative Performance
law judges ....... 492,155 307,173 Report ............. 199,230 201,666
Meals and Total Board
representation . . . 377,963 534,618 paid to the
Equipment and Council ......... $ 637,890 $ 937,586
facilities rental . . . 307,999 439,751
Security Council paid to the
investigations .... 286,711 473,659 Board:
Former employee Data processing
related services .... 3,360,055 3,485,701
related
Administrative
payments ........ 205,627 507,082
services ........... 133,500 72,250
Miscellaneous ........ 577,952 700,084 Total Council
Total other paid to the
expenses ........ $6,515,129 $6,642,118 Board ........... $3,493,555 $3,557,951

Board of Governors Financial Statements 311
(9) Federal Reserve Banks
The Board performs certain functions for the Reserve
Banks in conjunction with its responsibilities for the
Federal Reserve System, and the Federal Reserve Banks
provide certain administrative functions for the Board.
Activity related to the Board and Reserve Banks for 2004
and 2003 is summarized in the following table:
2004 2003
Board paid to the
Reserve Banks:
Assessments for
employee benefits . . $ 2,151,078 $ 2,137,781
Data processing and
communication .... 1,920,996 1,963,247
Contingency site ........ 1,481,452 704,699
Total Board paid
to the Reserve
Banks ........... $ 5,553,526 $ 4,805,727
Reserve Banks paid
to the Board:
Assessments for
currency costs ...... $503,784,304 $508,144,248
Assessments for
operating expenses
of the Board ....... 272,331,500 297,020,200
Data processing ......... 686,312 1,484,015
Total Reserve Banks
paid to the
Board ........... $776,802,116 $806,648,463

312 91st Annual Report, 2004
KPMG LLP
2001 M Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Independent Auditors’ Report on Internal Control over Financial Reporting
To the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:
We have audited the balance sheets of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the Board)
as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, and the related statements of revenues and expenses and changes in
cumulative results of operations, and cash flows for the years then ended, and have issued our report
thereon dated April 1, 2005. We conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally
accepted in the United States of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in
Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States.
In planning and performing our fiscal year 2004 audit, we considered the Board’s internal control over
financial reporting by obtaining an understanding of the Board’s internal control, determining whether
these internal controls had been placed in operation, assessing control risk, and performing tests of controls
in order to determine our auditing procedures for the purpose of expressing our opinion on the financial
statements. We limited our internal control testing to those controls necessary to achieve the objectives
described in Government Auditing Standards. The objective of our audit was not to provide assurance on
the Board’s internal control over financial reporting. Consequently, we do not provide an opinion thereon.
Our consideration of the internal control over financial reporting would not necessarily disclose all matters
in the internal control over financial reporting that might be material weaknesses under standards issued by
the American Institute of Certified Public Accountants. Material weaknesses are conditions in which the
design or operation of one or more of the internal control components does not reduce to a relatively low
level the risk that misstatements, in amounts that would be material in relation to the financial statements
being audited, may occur and not be detected within a timely period by employees in the normal course of
performing their assigned functions. Because of inherent limitations in any internal control, misstatements
due to error or fraud may occur and not be detected. However, we noted no matters involving the internal
control and its operation that we consider to be material weaknesses as defined above.
We noted other matters involving internal control and its operation that we have reported to the
management of the Board in a separate letter dated April 1, 2005.
This report is intended solely for the information and use of the members of the Board and its management,
the Office of the Inspector General, and Congress and is not intended to be and should not be used by
anyone other than these specified parties.
April 1, 2005
KPMG LLP, a U.S. limited liability partnership, is the U.S.
member firm of KPMG International, a Swiss cooperative.

Board of Governors Financial Statements 313
KPMG LLP
2001 M Street, NW
Washington, DC 20036
Independent Auditors’ Report on Compliance and Other Matters
To the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System:
We have audited the balance sheets of the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System (the Board)
as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, and the related statements of revenues and expenses and changes in
cumulative results of operations, and cash flows for the years then ended, and have issued our report
thereon dated April 1, 2005. We conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally
accepted in the United States of America and the standards applicable to financial audits contained in
Government Auditing Standards, issued by the Comptroller General of the United States.
The management of the Board is responsible for complying with laws, regulations, and contracts applicable
to the Board. As part of obtaining reasonable assurance about whether the Board’s 2004 financial
statements are free of material misstatement, we performed tests of the Board’s compliance with certain
provisions of laws, regulations, and contracts, noncompliance with which could have a direct and material
effect on the determination of financial statement amounts. We limited our tests of compliance to the
provisions described in the preceding sentence, and we did not test compliance with all laws, regulations,
and contracts applicable to the Board. However, providing an opinion on compliance with laws,
regulations, and contracts was not an objective of our audit and, accordingly, we do not express such an
opinion.
The results of our tests of compliance described in the preceding paragraph of this report disclosed no
instances of noncompliance or other matters that are required to be reported herein under Government
Auditing Standards.
This report is intended solely for the information and use of the members of the Board and its management,
the Office of the Inspector General, and Congress and is not intended to be and should not be used by
anyone other than these specified parties.
April 1, 2005
KPMG LLP, a U.S. limited liability partnership, is the U.S.
member firm of KPMG International, a Swiss cooperative.

315
Federal Reserve Banks
Combined Financial Statements
The combined financial statements of the Federal Reserve Banks were audited by
PricewaterhouseCoopers LLP, independent auditors, for the years ended
December 31, 2004 and 2003.
Report of Independent Auditors
To the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System
and the Board of Directors of the Federal Reserve Banks:
We have audited the accompanying combined statements of condition of the
Federal Reserve Banks (the ‘‘Reserve Banks’’) as of December 31, 2004 and 2003,
and the related combined statements of income and changes in capital for the years
then ended, which have been prepared in conformity with the accounting prin­
ciples, policies, and practices established by the Board of Governors of the Federal
Reserve System. These combined financial statements are the responsibility of the
Reserve Banks’ management. Our responsibility is to express an opinion on these
combined financial statements based on our audits.
We conducted our audits in accordance with auditing standards generally
accepted in the United States of America. Those standards require that we plan and
perform the audit to obtain reasonable assurance about whether the combined
financial statements are free of material misstatement. An audit includes examin­
ing, on a test basis, evidence supporting the amounts and disclosures in the
financial statements. An audit also includes assessing the accounting principles
used and significant estimates made by management, as well as evaluating the
overall financial statement presentation. We believe that our audits provide a
reasonable basis for our opinion.
As described in Note 3, these combined financial statements were prepared in
conformity with the accounting principles, policies, and practices established by
the Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System. These principles, policies,
and practices, which were designed to meet the specialized accounting and report­
ing needs of the Federal Reserve System, are set forth in the Financial Accounting
Manual for Federal Reserve Banks and constitute a comprehensive basis of
accounting other than accounting principles generally accepted in the United States
of America.
In our opinion, the combined financial statements referred to above present
fairly, in all material respects, the combined financial position of the Reserve
Banks as of December 31, 2004 and 2003, and the combined results of their
operations for the years then ended, on the basis of accounting described in Note 3.
April 4, 2005
Washington, D.C.

316 91st Annual Report, 2004
FEDERALRESERVEBANKS
COMBINEDSTATEMENTSOFCONDITION
December31,2004and2003
(inmillions)
Assets 2004 2003
Goldcertificates ..................................................................... $ 11,041 $ 11,039
Specialdrawingrightscertificates..................................................... 2,200 2,200
Coin ................................................................................ 728 722
Itemsinprocessofcollection ......................................................... 6,233 7,793
Loanstodepositoryinstitutions ....................................................... 43 62
Securitiespurchasedunderagreementstoresell ........................................ 33,000 43,750
U.S.governmentsecurities,net ....................................................... 725,584 675,569
Investmentsdenominatedinforeigncurrencies......................................... 21,368 19,868
Accruedinterestreceivable ........................................................... 5,104 5,064
Bankpremisesandequipment,net .................................................... 2,216 2,117
Otherassets ......................................................................... 3,350 3,303
Totalassets ................................................................... $810,867 $771,487
Liabilities and Capital
Liabilities
FederalReservenotesoutstanding,net .............................................. $719,437 $689,757
Securitiessoldunderagreementstorepurchase ...................................... 30,783 25,652
Deposits
Depositoryinstitutions .......................................................... 24,043 23,058
U.S.Treasury,generalaccount ................................................... 5,912 5,723
Otherdeposits .................................................................. 332 394
Deferredcredititems .............................................................. 5,306 7,582
InterestonFederalReservenotesdueU.S.Treasury ................................. 329 428
Accruedbenefitcosts .............................................................. 891 956
Otherliabilities.................................................................... 290 243
Totalliabilities ............................................................... 787,323 753,793
Capital
Capitalpaid-in .................................................................... 11,914 8,847
Surplus ........................................................................... 11,630 8,847
Totalcapital .................................................................. 23,544 17,694
Totalliabilitiesandcapital..................................................... $810,867 $771,487
Theaccompanyingnotesareanintegralpartofthesecombinedfinancialstatements.

Federal Reserve Banks Combined Financial Statements 317
FEDERALRESERVEBANKS
COMBINEDSTATEMENTSOFINCOME
fortheyearsendedDecember31,2004and2003
(inmillions)
2004 2003
Interestincome
InterestonU.S.governmentsecurities ............................................... $22,344 $22,597
Interestoninvestmentsdenominatedinforeigncurrencies............................. 269 260
Interestonloanstodepositoryinstitutions............................................ 3 1
Totalinterestincome .......................................................... 22,616 22,858
Interestexpense
Interestexpenseonsecuritiessoldunderagreementstorepurchase..................... 290 215
Netinterestincome ............................................................ 22,326 22,643
Otheroperatingincome
Incomefromservices ............................................................... 866 887
Reimbursableservicestogovernmentagencies ....................................... 370 328
Foreigncurrencygains,net ......................................................... 1,217 2,695
Otherincome ...................................................................... 89 79
Totalotheroperatingincome ................................................... 2,542 3,989
Operatingexpenses
Salariesandotherbenefits .......................................................... 1,604 1,819
Occupancyexpense ................................................................ 222 213
Equipmentexpense................................................................. 245 257
AssessmentsbyBoardofGovernors ................................................. 776 805
Otherexpenses ..................................................................... 578 532
Totaloperatingexpenses ....................................................... 3,425 3,626
Netincomepriortodistribution ....................................................... $21,443 $23,006
Distributionofnetincome
Dividendspaidtomemberbanks .................................................... $ 582 $ 518
Transferredtosurplus .............................................................. 2,783 467
PaymentstoU.S.TreasuryasinterestonFederalReservenotes ........................ 18,078 22,021
Totaldistribution .............................................................. $21,443 $23,006
Theaccompanyingnotesareanintegralpartofthesecombinedfinancialstatements.

318 91st Annual Report, 2004
FEDERAL RESERVE BANKS
COMBINED STATEMENTS OF CHANGES IN CAPITAL
for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003
(in millions)
Capital Total
paid-in Surplus capital
Balance at January 1, 2003
(167 million shares) ............................................... $ 8,380 $ 8,380 $16,760
Transferred to surplus ............................................... . . . 467 467
Net change in capital stock issued
(9 million shares) ............................................... 467 ... 467
Balance at December 31, 2003
(176 million shares) ............................................... $ 8,847 $ 8,847 $17,694
Transferred to surplus ............................................... . . . 2,783 2,783
Net change in capital stock issued
(61 million shares) .............................................. 3,067 ... 3,067
Balance at December 31, 2004
(238 million shares) ............................................... $11,914 $11,630 $23,544
The accompanying notes are an integral part of these combined financial statements.
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks
(1) Structure Act, supervision and control of each Reserve Bank is
exercised by a Board of Directors. The Federal Reserve
The twelve Federal Reserve Banks (Reserve Banks) are Act specifies the composition of the Board of Directors
part of the Federal Reserve System (System) created by for each of the Reserve Banks. Each board is composed
Congress under the Federal Reserve Act of 1913 (Federal of nine members serving three-year terms: three directors,
Reserve Act) which established the central bank of the including those designated as Chairman and Deputy
United States. The Reserve Banks are chartered by the Chairman, are appointed by the Board of Governors, and
federal government and possess a unique set of govern- six directors are elected by member banks. Of the six
mental, corporate, and central bank characteristics. Other elected by member banks, three represent the public and
major elements of the System are the Board of Governors three represent member banks. Member banks are divided
of the Federal Reserve System (Board of Governors), the into three classes according to size. Member banks in
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) and the Fed- each class elect one director representing member banks
eral Advisory Council. The FOMC is composed of mem- and one representing the public. In any election of direc­
bers of the Board of Governors, the president of the tors, each member bank receives one vote, regardless of
Federal Reserve Bank of New York (FRBNY) and, on a the number of shares of Reserve Bank stock it holds.
rotating basis, four other Reserve Bank presidents. Banks
that are members of the System include all national banks
(2) Operations and Services
and any state-chartered bank that applies and is approved
for membership in the System.
The System performs a variety of services and operations.
Although the Reserve Banks are chartered as indepen-
Functions include formulating and conducting monetary
dent organizations overseen by the Board of Governors,
policy; participating actively in the payments mechanism,
the Reserve Banks work jointly to carry out their statu-
including large-dollar transfers of funds, automated clear­
tory responsibilities. The majority of the assets, liabilities,
inghouse (ACH) operations and check processing; distrib­
and income of the Reserve Banks is derived from central
uting coin and currency; performing fiscal agency func­
bank activities and responsibilities with regard to mone-
tions for the U.S. Treasury and certain federal agencies;
tary policy and currency. For this reason, the accompany-
serving as the federal government’s bank; providing
ing combined set of financial statements for the twelve
short-term loans to depository institutions; serving the
independent Reserve Banks is prepared with adjustments
consumer and the community by providing educational
to eliminate interdistrict accounts and transactions.
materials and information regarding consumer laws;
supervising bank holding companies, state member banks
Board of Directors and U.S. offices of foreign banking organizations; and
administering other regulations of the Board of Gover-
The Reserve Banks serve twelve Federal Reserve Dis- nors. The Board of Governors’ operating costs are funded
tricts nationwide. In accordance with the Federal Reserve through assessments on the Reserve Banks.

Federal Reserve Banks Combined Financial Statements 319
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
In performing fiscal agency functions for the U.S. requires management to make certain estimates and
Treasury, seven Reserve Banks provide U.S. securities assumptions that affect the reported amounts of assets and
direct purchase and savings bond processing services. In liabilities, disclosure of contingent assets and liabilities at
March 2004, the U.S. Treasury provided an implementa­ the date of the combined financial statements, and the
tion plan for consolidating the provision of these services reported amounts of income and expenses during the
at the Cleveland and Minneapolis Reserve Banks. The reporting period. Actual results could differ from those
costs for the associated restructuring for the affected estimates. Certain amounts relating to the prior year have
Banks have been included in footnote 10. been reclassified to conform to the current-year presenta­
The FOMC establishes policy regarding open market tion. Unique accounts and significant accounting policies
operations, oversees these operations, and issues authori­ are explained below.
zations and directives to the FRBNY for its execution of
transactions. Authorized transaction types include direct (A) Gold Certificates
purchase and sale of securities, the purchase of securities
under agreements to resell, the sale of securities under The Secretary of the Treasury is authorized to issue gold
agreements to repurchase, and the lending of U.S. govern­ certificates to the Reserve Banks to monetize gold held
ment securities. The FRBNY is also authorized by the by the U.S. Treasury. Payment for the gold certificates by
FOMC to hold balances of, and to execute spot and the Reserve Banks is made by crediting equivalent
forward foreign exchange (‘‘F/X’’) and securities con­ amounts in dollars into the account established for the
tracts in, nine foreign currencies and to invest such for­ U.S. Treasury. These gold certificates held by the Reserve
eign currency holdings ensuring adequate liquidity is Banks are required to be backed by the gold of the U.S.
maintained. In addition, FRBNY is authorized to main­ Treasury. The U.S. Treasury may reacquire the gold cer­
tain reciprocal currency arrangements (‘‘F/X swaps’’) tificates at any time and the Reserve Banks must deliver
with various central banks, and ‘‘warehouse’’ foreign them to the U.S. Treasury. At such time, the U.S. Trea­
currencies for the U.S. Treasury and Exchange Stabiliza­ sury’s account is charged and the Reserve Banks’ gold
tion Fund (‘‘ESF’’) through the Reserve Banks. certificate account is lowered. The value of gold for
purposes of backing the gold certificates is set by law at
(3) Significant Accounting Policies $422⁄9 a fine troy ounce.
Accounting principles for entities with the unique powers
and responsibilities of the nation’s central bank have not (B) Special Drawing Rights Certificates
been formulated by the Financial Accounting Standards
Board. The Board of Governors has developed special­ Special drawing rights (SDRs) are issued by the Interna­
ized accounting principles and practices that it believes tional Monetary Fund (Fund) to its members in propor­
are appropriate for the significantly different nature and tion to each member’s quota in the Fund at the time of
function of a central bank as compared with the private issuance. SDRs serve as a supplement to international
sector. These accounting principles and practices are monetary reserves and may be transferred from one
documented in the Financial Accounting Manual for Fed­ national monetary authority to another. Under the law
eral Reserve Banks (Financial Accounting Manual), providing for United States participation in the SDR
which is issued by the Board of Governors. All Reserve system, the Secretary of the U.S. Treasury is authorized to
Banks are required to adopt and apply accounting policies issue SDR certificates, somewhat like gold certificates, to
and practices that are consistent with the Financial the Reserve Banks. At such time, equivalent amounts in
Accounting Manual. dollars are credited to the account established for the U.S.
These combined financial statements have been pre­ Treasury, and the Reserve Banks’ SDR certificate account
pared in accordance with the Financial Accounting is increased. The Reserve Banks are required to purchase
Manual. Differences exist between the accounting prin­ SDR certificates, at the direction of the U.S. Treasury, for
ciples and practices of the System and generally accepted the purpose of financing SDR acquisitions or for financ­
accounting principles in the United States of America ing exchange stabilization operations. There were no SDR
(GAAP). The primary difference is the presentation of all transactions in 2004 or 2003.
security holdings at amortized cost, rather than at the fair
value presentation requirements of GAAP. In addition, (C) Loans to Depository Institutions
the Board of Governors and the Reserve Banks have
elected not to present a Statement of Cash Flows. The The Depository Institutions Deregulation and Monetary
Statement of Cash Flows has not been included, because Control Act of 1980 provides that all depository insti­
the liquidity and cash position of the Reserve Banks are tutions that maintain reservable transaction accounts or
not of primary concern to users of these combined finan­ nonpersonal time deposits, as defined in Regulation D
cial statements. Other information regarding the Reserve issued by the Board of Governors, have borrowing privi­
Banks’ activities is provided in, or may be derived from, leges at the discretion of the Reserve Banks. Borrowers
the Statements of Condition, Income, and Changes in execute certain lending agreements and deposit suffi­
Capital. A Statement of Cash Flows, therefore, would not cient collateral before credit is extended. Loans are evalu­
provide any additional useful information. There are no ated for collectibility, and currently all are considered
other significant differences between the policies outlined collectible and fully collateralized. If loans were ever
in the Financial Accounting Manual and GAAP. deemed to be uncollectible, an appropriate reserve would
The preparation of the combined financial statements be established. Interest is accrued using the applicable
in conformity with the Financial Accounting Manual discount rate established at least every fourteen days by

320 91st Annual Report, 2004
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
the Board of Directors of each Reserve Bank, subject to currencies that it may need for intervention operations to
review by the Board of Governors. support the dollar and give the partner foreign central
bank temporary access to dollars it may need to support
its own currency. Drawings under the F/X swap arrange­
(D) U.S. Government Securities and Investments ments can be initiated by either the FRBNY or the partner
Denominated in Foreign Currencies foreign central bank and must be agreed to by the drawee.
The F/X swaps are structured so that the party initiating
The FOMC has designated the FRBNY to execute open the transaction (the drawer) bears the exchange rate risk
market transactions on its behalf and to hold the resulting upon maturity. The Bank will generally invest the foreign
securities in the portfolio known as the System Open currency received under an F/X swap in interest-bearing
Market Account (SOMA). In addition to authorizing and instruments.
directing operations in the domestic securities market, Warehousing is an arrangement under which the
the FOMC authorizes and directs the FRBNY to execute FOMC agrees to exchange, at the request of the Treasury,
operations in foreign markets for major currencies in U.S. dollars for foreign currencies held by the Treasury
order to counter disorderly conditions in exchange mar­ or ESF over a limited period of time. The purpose of the
kets or to meet other needs specified by the FOMC in warehousing facility is to supplement the U.S. dollar
carrying out the System’s central bank responsibilities. resources of the Treasury and ESF for financing pur­
Such authorizations are reviewed and approved annually chases of foreign currencies and related international
by the FOMC. operations.
In addition to sales of securities under agreements to In connection with its foreign currency activities, the
repurchase, the FRBNY may engage in tri-party pur­ FRBNY, on behalf of the Reserve Banks, may enter into
chases of securities under agreements to resell (tri-party contracts that contain varying degrees of off-balance­
agreements). Tri-party agreements are conducted with sheet market risk, because they represent contractual com­
two custodial banks that manage the clearing and settle­ mitments involving future settlement, and counter-party
ment of collateral. Acceptable collateral under tri-party credit risk. The FRBNY controls credit risk by obtaining
agreements primarily includes U.S. government securi­ credit approvals, establishing transaction limits, and per­
ties, pass-through mortgage securities of Government forming daily monitoring procedures.
National Mortgage Association, Federal Home Loan While the application of current market prices to the
Mortgage Corporation, and Federal National Mortgage securities currently held in the SOMA portfolio and
Association, STRIP securities of the U.S. government and investments denominated in foreign currencies may result
‘‘stripped’’ securities of other government agencies. The in values substantially above or below their carrying
tri-party agreements are accounted for as financing trans­ values, these unrealized changes in value would have no
actions with the associated interest income accrued over direct effect on the quantity of reserves available to the
the life of the agreements. banking system or on the prospects for future Reserve
The FRBNY has sole authorization by the FOMC to Bank earnings or capital. Both the domestic and foreign
lend U.S. government securities held in the SOMA to U.S. components of the SOMA portfolio from time to time
government securities dealers and to banks participating involve transactions that may result in gains or losses
in U.S. government securities clearing arrangements on when holdings are sold prior to maturity. Decisions
behalf of the System, in order to facilitate the effective regarding the securities and foreign currencies transac­
functioning of the domestic securities market. These tions, including their purchase and sale, are motivated
securities-lending transactions are fully collateralized by by monetary policy objectives rather than profit. Accord­
other U.S. government securities. FOMC policy requires ingly, market values, earnings, and any gains or losses
FRBNY to take possession of collateral in excess of the resulting from the sale of such currencies and securities
market values of the securities loaned. The market values are incidental to the open market operations and do not
of the collateral and the securities loaned are monitored motivate its activities or policy decisions.
by the FRBNY on a daily basis, with additional collateral U.S. government securities and investments denomi­
obtained as necessary. The securities lent are accounted nated in foreign currencies comprising the SOMA are
for in the SOMA. recorded at cost, on a settlement-date basis, and adjusted
F/X contracts are contractual agreements between two for amortization of premiums or accretion of discounts on
parties to exchange specified currencies, at a specified a straight-line basis. Securities sold under agreements to
price, on a specified date. Spot foreign contracts normally repurchase are accounted for as secured borrowing trans­
settle two days after the trade date, whereas the settlement actions with the associated interest expense recognized
date on forward contracts is negotiated between the con­ over the life of the transaction. Such transactions are
tracting parties, but will extend beyond two days from the settled by FRBNY. Interest income is accrued on a
trade date. The FRBNY generally enters into spot con­ straight-line basis. Income earned on securities lending
tracts, with any forward contracts generally limited to the transactions is reported as a component of ‘‘Other
second leg of a swap/warehousing transaction. income.’’ Gains and losses resulting from sales of securi­
The FRBNY, on behalf of the Reserve Banks, main­ ties are determined by specific issues based on average
tains renewable, short-term F/X swap arrangements with cost. Foreign-currency-denominated assets are revalued
two authorized foreign central banks. The parties agree to daily at current market exchange rates in order to report
exchange their currencies up to a pre-arranged maximum these assets in U.S. dollars. Realized and unrealized gains
amount and for an agreed-upon period of time (up to and losses on investments denominated in foreign curren­
twelve months), at an agreed-upon interest rate. These cies are reported as ‘‘Foreign currency gains (losses),
arrangements give the FOMC temporary access to foreign net.’’

Federal Reserve Banks Combined Financial Statements 321
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
Activity related to U.S. government securities bought larly deducted. The Board of Governors may, at any time,
outright, securities sold under agreements to repurchase, call upon a Reserve Bank for additional security to ade­
securities loaned, investments denominated in foreign quately collateralize the Federal Reserve notes. To satisfy
currency, excluding those held under an F/X swap the obligation to provide sufficient collateral for out­
arrangement, and deposit accounts of foreign central standing Federal Reserve notes, the Reserve Banks have
banks and governments above core balances are allocated entered into an agreement that provides that certain assets
to each Reserve Bank. U.S. government securities pur­ of the Reserve Banks are jointly pledged as collateral
chased under agreements to resell and unrealized gains for the Federal Reserve notes of all Reserve Banks. In
and losses on the revaluation of foreign currency holdings the event that this collateral is insufficient, the Federal
under F/X swaps and warehousing arrangements are allo­ Reserve Act provides that Federal Reserve notes become
cated to the FRBNY and not to other Reserve Banks. a first and paramount lien on all the assets of the Reserve
In 2003, additional interest income of $61 million, Banks. Finally, as obligations of the United States, Fed­
representing one day’s interest on the SOMA portfolio, eral Reserve notes are backed by the full faith and credit
was accrued to reflect a change in interest accrual calcula­ of the United States government.
tions. The effect of this change was not material; there­ The ‘‘Federal Reserve notes outstanding, net’’ account
fore, it was included in 2003 interest income. represents Federal Reserve notes outstanding reduced by
the Reserve Banks’ currency holdings of $128,933 mil­
lion and $110,176 million at December 31, 2004 and
(E) Bank Premises, Equipment, and Software
2003, respectively.
At December 31, 2004, all Federal Reserve notes out­
Bank premises and equipment are stated at cost less
standing were fully collateralized. All gold certificates,
accumulated depreciation. Depreciation is calculated on a
all special drawing rights certificates, and $706,196 mil­
straight-line basis over estimated useful lives of assets
lion of domestic securities and securities purchased under
ranging from two to fifty years. Major alterations, renova­
agreements to resell were pledged as collateral. At
tions and improvements are capitalized at cost as addi­
December 31, 2004, no loans or investments denominated
tions to the asset accounts and are amortized over the
in foreign currencies were pledged as collateral.
remaining useful life of the asset. Maintenance, repairs
and minor replacements are charged to operations in the
(G) Capital Paid-In
year incurred. Costs incurred for software, either devel­
oped internally or acquired for internal use, during the
The Federal Reserve Act requires that each member bank
application stage are capitalized based on the cost of
subscribe to the capital stock of the Reserve Bank in an
direct services and materials associated with designing,
amount equal to 6 percent of the capital and surplus of the
coding, installing, or testing software. Capitalized soft­
member bank. As a member bank’s capital and surplus
ware costs are amortized on a straight-line basis over the
changes, its holdings of the Reserve Bank’s stock must
estimated useful lives of the software applications, which
be adjusted. Member banks are state-chartered banks that
range from two to five years.
apply and are approved for membership in the System
and all national banks. Currently, only one-half of the
(F) Federal Reserve Notes subscription is paid-in and the remainder is subject to
call. These shares are nonvoting with a par value of $100.
Federal Reserve notes are the circulating currency of the They may not be transferred or hypothecated. By law,
United States. These notes are issued through the various each member bank is entitled to receive an annual
Federal Reserve agents (the Chairman of the Board of dividend of 6 percent on the paid-in capital stock. This
Directors of each Reserve Bank) to the Reserve Banks cumulative dividend is paid semiannually. A member
upon deposit with such agents of certain classes of collat­ bank is liable for Reserve Bank liabilities up to twice the
eral security, typically U.S. government securities. These par value of stock subscribed by it.
notes are identified as issued to a specific Reserve Bank. The Financial Accounting Standards Board (FASB)
The Federal Reserve Act provides that the collateral has deferred the implementation date for SFAS No. 150,
security tendered by the Reserve Bank to the Federal ‘‘Accounting for Certain Financial Instruments with Char­
Reserve agent must be equal to the sum of the notes acteristics of both Liabilities and Equity’’ for the Banks.
applied for by such Reserve Bank. In 2003, the Federal When applicable, the Banks will determine the impact
Reserve Act was amended to expand the assets eligible to and provide the appropriate disclosures.
be pledged as collateral security to include all Federal
Reserve Bank assets. Prior to the amendment, only gold (H) Surplus
certificates, special drawing rights certificates, U.S. gov­
ernment securities, securities purchased under agree­ The Board of Governors requires Reserve Banks to main­
ments to resell, loans to depository institutions, and tain a surplus equal to the amount of capital paid-in as of
investments denominated in foreign currencies could be December 31. This amount is intended to provide addi­
pledged as collateral. The collateral value is equal to the tional capital and reduce the possibility that the Reserve
book value of the collateral tendered, with the exception Banks would be required to call on member banks for
of securities, whose collateral value is equal to the par additional capital.
value of the securities tendered and securities purchased Pursuant to Section 16 of the Federal Reserve Act,
under agreements to resell, which are valued at the Reserve Banks are required by the Board of Governors
contract amount. The par value of securities pledged for to transfer to the U.S. Treasury as interest on Federal
securities sold under agreements to repurchase is simi­ Reserve notes excess earnings, after providing for the

322 91st Annual Report, 2004
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
costs of operations, payment of dividends, and reserva­ 2004 2003
tion of an amount necessary to equate surplus with capital
paid-in. Par value
In the event of losses or an increase in capital paid-in, U.S. government
Bills .................... $262,970 $244,833
payments to the U.S. Treasury are suspended and earn­ Notes ................... 360,832 323,361
ings are retained until the surplus is equal to the capital Bonds ................... 94,017 98,471
paid-in. Weekly payments to the U.S. Treasury may vary
Total par value ...... 717,819 666,665
significantly.
In the event of a decrease in capital paid-in, the excess Unamortized premiums ....... 9,405 9,797
surplus, after equating capital paid-in and surplus at Unaccreted discounts ......... (1,640) (893)
December 31, is distributed to U.S. Treasury in the fol­ Total ............... $725,584 $675,569
lowing year. This amount is reported as a component
of ‘‘Payments to U.S. Treasury as interest on Federal
Reserve notes.’’ The maturity distribution of U.S. government securities
bought outright, securities purchased under agreements to
(I) Income and Costs Related to Treasury Services resell, and securities sold under agreements to repurchase,
which were held in the SOMA at December 31, 2004,
Reserve Banks are required by the Federal Reserve Act was as follows (in millions):
to serve as fiscal agents and depositories of the United
States. By statute, the Department of the Treasury is Securities Securities
permitted, but not required, to pay for these services. purchased sold
under under
agree- agree-
(J) Taxes U.S. ments to ments to
government resell repurchase
The Reserve Banks are exempt from federal, state, and Maturities of securities (Contract (Contract
local taxes, except for taxes on real property. Real prop­ securities held (Par) amount) amount)
ery taxes were $33 million for each of the years ended
December 31, 2004 and 2003, and are reported as a Within 15 days . . . $ 30,647 $33,000 $30,783
component of ‘‘Occupancy expense.’’ 16daysto90days. 178,355 . . . . . .
91daysto1year.. 170,411 ... ...
Over 1 year to
(K) Restructuring Charges 5 years ...... 208,269 . . . . . .
Over 5 years to
In 2003, the System started the restructuring of several 10years ..... 54,372 . . . . . .
operations, primarily check, cash, and Treasury services. Over 10 years ..... 75,765 ... ...
The restructuring included streamlining the management Total .... $717,819 $33,000 $30,783
and support structures, reducing staff, decreasing the
number of processing locations, and increasing process­
ing capacity in the remaining locations. These restructur­ At December 31, 2004 and 2003, U.S. government
ing activities continued in 2004. securities, net with par values of $6,609 million and
Footnote 10 describes the restructuring and provides $4,426 million, respectively, were loaned from the
information about the Banks’ costs and liabilities associ­ SOMA.
ated with employee separations and contract terminations. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, securities sold under
The costs associated with the write-down of certain Bank agreements to repurchase with a contract amount of
assets are discussed in footnote 6. Costs and liabilities $30,783 million and $25,652 million, respectively, were
associated with enhanced pension benefits for all Reserve outstanding. At December 31, 2004 and 2003, securities
Banks are recorded on the books of the FRBNY. sold under agreements to repurchase with a par value of
$30,808 million and $25,658 million, respectively, were
(4) U.S. Government Securities outstanding.
Securities bought outright are held in the SOMA at the (5) Investments Denominated in
FRBNY. Foreign Currencies
Total securities held in the SOMA at December 31 that The FRBNY, on behalf of the Reserve Banks, holds
were bought outright, were as follows (in millions): foreign currency deposits with foreign central banks and
the Bank for International Settlements, and invests in
foreign government debt instruments. Foreign govern­
ment debt instruments held include both securities bought
outright and securities purchased under agreements to
resell. These investments are guaranteed as to principal
and interest by the foreign governments.

Federal Reserve Banks Combined Financial Statements 323
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
Total investments denominated in foreign currencies, Bank premises and equipment at December 31 include
valued at current foreign currency market exchange rates the following amounts for leases that have been capital­
at December 31, were as follows (in millions): ized (in millions):
2004 2003 2004 2003
European Union euro Bank premises and equipment .......... $11 $ 9
Foreign currency deposits ...... $ 6,063 $ 6,870 Accumulated depreciation .............. (6) (6)
Securities purchased under Capitalized leases, net ........... $ 5 $ 3
agreements to resell ....... 2,142 2,057
Government debt instruments . . 3,840 2,033
Certain of the Reserve Banks lease unused space to
Japanese yen outside tenants. Those leases have terms ranging from 1
Foreign currency deposits ...... 1,540 1,475 to 12 years. Rental income from such leases totaled
Government debt instruments . . 7,660 7,341
$21 million and $20 million for the years ended Decem­
Accrued interest ................. 123 92 ber 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Future minimum
lease payments under noncancelable agreements in exist­
Total .................. $21,368 $19,868 ence at December 31, 2004, were (in millions):
The maturity distribution of investments denominated 2005 ........................................... $ 20
in foreign currencies at December 31, 2004, was as 2006 ........................................... 17
follows (in millions): 2007 ........................................... 12
Maturities of investments European 2008 ........................................... 11
denominated Union Japanese 2009 ........................................... 10
in foreign currencies euro yen Total Thereafter ...................................... 43
Total ................................. $113
Within 1 year ............. $ 8,978 $9,199 $18,177
Over 1 year to 5 years ..... 3,006 ... 3,006
Over 5 years to 10 years ... 185 ... 185 The Reserve Banks have capitalized software assets,
Over 10 years ............. ... ... ... net of amortization, of $203 million and $164 million at
Total ............ $12,169 $9,199 $21,368 December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Amortization
expense was $56 million and $54 million for the years
ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively.
At December 31, 2004 and 2003, there were no out­ Several Reserve Banks impaired assets as a result of
standing F/X swaps or material open foreign exchange the System’s restructuring plans, as discussed in foot­
contracts. note 10. Impaired assets include software, buildings,
At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the warehousing facil­ leasehold improvements, furniture, and equipment. Asset
ity was $5,000 million, with no balance outstanding. impairment losses related to the restructuring and check
processing standardization of $21 million and $11 million
(6) Bank Premises, Equipment, and Software for the years ended December 31, 2004 and 2003, respec­
tively, were determined using fair values based on quoted
A summary of bank premises and equipment at Decem­
market values or other valuation techniques and are
ber 31 is as follows (in millions):
reported as a component of ‘‘Other expenses.’’
Three Reserve Banks are constructing new buildings,
Maximum
useful one to replace the head office and two to replace branch
life offices. At December 31, 2004, the contractual obligation
(in years) 2004 2003 for these projects has been recognized or is reported as a
commitment in footnote 7 below.
Bank premises and
equipment (7) Commitments and Contingencies
Land .................... N/A $ 274 $ 244
Buildings ............... 50 1,631 1,559
Building machinery and At December 31, 2004, the Reserve Banks were obligated
equipment .......... 20 373 364 under noncancelable leases for premises and equipment
Construction in progress . . N/A 202 96 with terms ranging from 1 to 20 years. These leases
Furniture and equipment . 10 1,200 1,334 provide for increased rental payments based upon
Subtotal ............ $3,680 $3,597 increases in real estate taxes, operating costs, or selected
price indices.
Accumulated Rental expense under operating leases for certain oper­
depreciation ........ (1,464) (1,480) ating facilities, warehouses, and data processing and
Bank premises and office equipment (including taxes, insurance and mainte­
equipment, net . $2,216 $2,117 nance when included in rent), net of sublease rentals, was
$70 million and $71 million for the years ended Decem­
Depreciation expense, ber 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Certain of the
for the Reserve Banks’ leases have options to renew.
years ended .... $ 179 $ 184

324 91st Annual Report, 2004
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
Future minimum rental payments under noncancelable (8) Retirement and Thrift Plans
operating and capital leases, net of sublease rentals, with
terms of one year or more, at December 31, 2004, were Retirement Plans
(in millions):
The Reserve Banks currently offer two defined benefit
Operating Capital retirement plans to their employees, based on length of
service and level of compensation. Substantially all of
2005 ........................... $ 10.2 $ 1.6 the Reserve Banks’, Board of Governors’, and the Plan
2006 ........................... 8.9 1.5 Administrative Office’s employees participate in the
2007 ........................... 8.0 .6 Retirement Plan for Employees of the Federal Reserve
2008 ........................... 7.1 .2
2009 ........................... 7.2 .1 System (System Plan) and the Benefit Equalization
Thereafter ...................... 114.3 ... Retirement Plans offered by each individual Reserve
Bank (BEP). In addition, certain Bank officers participate
$155.7 $ 4.0 in a Supplemental Employee Retirement Plan (SERP).
Amount representing The System Plan is a multi-employer plan with contri­
Interest ...................... (.3) butions fully funded by participating employers. Partici­
pating employers are the Federal Reserve Banks, the
Present value of minimum
lease payments .......... $ 3.7 Board of Governors of the Federal Reserve System, and
the Office of Employee Benefits of the Federal Reserve
At December 31, 2004, the Reserve Banks had con­ Employee Benefits System. Certain Board employees not
tractual commitments through the year 2011 totaling covered by the Social Security Act also contribute to the
$307 million, $58 million of which has been recognized. plan. No separate accounting is maintained of assets
Purchases of $117 million and $76 million were made contributed by the participating employers. FRBNY acts
against these commitments during 2004 and 2003, respec­ as a sponsor of the Plan for the System and costs asso­
tively. These commitments are for goods and services for ciated with the Plan are not redistributed to other partici­
the maintenance of currency machines, check-processing­ pating employers. The prepaid pension cost includes
related services, and check transportation services, and amounts related to the participating employees of all
have variable and fixed components. The variable portion employers who participate in the plans.
of the commitment is for additional services above fixed Following is a reconciliation of the beginning and
contractual service limits. The fixed payments for the ending balances of the System Plan benefit obligation (in
next five years under these commitments are (in millions): millions):
Fixed 2004 2003
commitment
Estimated actuarial present value
2005 ....................................... $89.5 of projected benefit
2006 ....................................... 66.2 obligation at January 1 ........ $3,930 $3,523
2007 ....................................... 23.9 Service cost—benefits earned
2008 ....................................... .7 during the period ............. 116 109
2009 ....................................... .7 Interest cost on projected
benefit obligation ............. 245 232
Actuarial loss ..................... 457 192
The Reserve Banks are involved in certain legal actions Special termination loss ........... 20 67
and claims arising in the ordinary course of business. Contributions by plan participants . . 3 4
Although it is difficult to predict the ultimate outcome of Benefits paid ..................... (247) (197)
these actions, in management’s opinion, based on discus­ Plan amendments ................. ... ...
sions with counsel, the aforementioned litigation and Estimated actuarial present value
claims will be resolved without material adverse effect of projected benefit
on the financial position or results of operations of the obligation at December 31 .... $4,524 $3,930
Reserve Banks.

Federal Reserve Banks Combined Financial Statements 325
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
Following is a reconciliation of the beginning and 2004 2003
ending balances of the System Plan assets, the funded
status, and the prepaid pension benefit costs (in millions): Service cost—benefits earned
during the period .............. $ 116 $ 109
Interest cost on projected
2004 2003 benefit obligation ............. 245 232
Amortization of prior service
Estimated fair value of plan cost .......................... 24 26
assets at January 1 ............ $5,703 $4,997 Recognized net loss ................ 20 42
Actual return on plan assets ........ 428 899 Expected return on plan assets ...... (462) (418)
Contributions by plan participants . . 3 4
Employer contributions ............ ... ... Net periodic pension benefit credit . . (57) (9)
Benefits paid ..................... (247) (197) Special termination benefits ........ 20 67
Estimated fair value of plan Net periodic pension benefit
assets at December 31 ........ $5,887 $5,703 (credit) cost ................... $ (37) $ 58
Funded status ..................... $1,362 $1,774
Unrecognized prior service cost .... 173 197 The recognition of special termination benefits is the
Unrecognized net actuarial loss .... 1,182 710 result of enhanced retirement benefits provided to 384
Prepaid pension benefit costs ...... $2,717 $2,681 System employees in conjunction with the restructuring
disclosed in footnote 10. Net periodic pension benefit
Prepaid pension benefit costs are reported as a component (credit) cost is reported as a component of ‘‘Salaries and
of ‘‘Other assets.’’ other benefits.’’
The expected benefit payments for the next ten years
The accumulated benefit obligation for the defined (in millions) are:
benefit pension plan was $3,894 million and $3,456 mil­
lion at December 31, 2004 and 2003, respectively. Expected
benefit
The weighted-average assumptions used in developing payments
the pension benefit obligation for the System Plan as of
2005 ........................................ $ 206
December 31 are as follows: 2006 ........................................ 219
2007 ........................................ 224
2004 2003 2008 ........................................ 228
Discount rate ....................... 5.75% 6.25% 2009 ........................................ 235
Rate of compensation increase ....... 4.25% 4.00% 2010–2014 .................................. 1,406
Total ........................................ $2,518
The weighted-average assumptions used in developing
net periodic benefit cost for the System Plan for the years The Federal Reserve System’s pension plan weighted-
ending December 31 are as follows: average asset allocations at December 31, by asset cate­
gory, are as follows:
2004 2003
Discount rate ....................... 6.25% 6.75% 2004 2003
Expected asset return ............... 8.25% 8.50% Equities ........................... 67.5% 61.9%
Rate of compensation increase ....... 4.00% 4.25% Fixed income ..................... 30.0% 34.8%
Cash .............................. 2.5% 3.3%
The long-term rate of return on assets was based on a
combination of methodologies including the System Total ............................. 100.0% 100.0%
Plan’s historical returns, surveys of other plans’ expected
rates of return, building a projected return for equities and The System’s Committee on Investment Performance
fixed income investments based on real interest rates, (CIP) contracts with investment managers who are
inflation expectations and equity risk premiums and responsible for implementing the System Plan’s invest­
finally, surveys of expected returns in equity and fixed ment policies. The managers’ performance is measured
income markets. against a trailing 36-month-benchmark of 60 percent of
The components of net periodic pension benefit (credit) a market value weighted index of predominantly large
cost for the System Plan as of December 31 are shown capitalization stocks trading on the New York Stock
below (in millions): Exchange, the American Stock Exchange, and the
National Association of Securities Dealers Automated
Quotation National Market System and 40 percent of a
broadly diversified investment-grade fixed income index
(rebalanced monthly). The managers invest Plan funds
within CIP-established guidelines for investment in
equities and fixed income instruments. Equity invest­
ments can range between 40 percent and 80 percent of the
portfolio. Investments, however, cannot be concentrated
in particular industries and equity security holdings of
any one company are limited. Fixed income securities

326 91st Annual Report, 2004
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
must be investment grade and the effective duration of At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the weighted-average
the fixed income portfolio must remain within a range discount rate assumptions used in developing the post­
of 67 percent and 150 percent of a broadly diversi­ retirement benefit obligation were 5.75 percent and
fied investment-grade fixed income index. CIP guidelines 6.25 percent, respectively.
prohibit margin, short sale, foreign exchange, and com­
modities trading as well as investment in bank, bank Following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending
holding company, savings and loan, and government balances of the plan assets, the unfunded postretirement
securities dealer’s stocks. In addition, investments in non­ benefit obligation and the accrued postretirement benefit
dollar denominated securities are prohibited; however, a costs (in millions):
small portion of the portfolio can be invested in American
Depositary Receipts/Shares and foreign-issued dollar 2004 2003
denominated fixed income securities.
FairvalueofplanassetsatJanuary1... $...... $......
The Federal Reserve System does not expect to make a Contributions by the employer ......... 42 34
cash contribution to the Retirement Plan during 2005. Contributions by plan participants ..... 8 6
The Reserve Banks’ projected benefit obligations and Benefits paid ......................... (50) (40)
net pension costs for the BEP and the SERP at Decem­
Fair value of plan assets at
ber 31, 2004 and 2003, and for the years then ended, are December31 .................... $... $...
not material.
Unfunded postretirement benefit
Thrift Plan obligation ....................... $869 $942
Unrecognized net curtailment gain ..... 5 2
Employees of the Reserve Banks may also participate in Unrecognized prior service cost ........ 128 122
the defined contribution Thrift Plan for Employees of Unrecognized net actuarial loss ........ (247) (246)
the Federal Reserve System (Thrift Plan). The Reserve Accrued postretirement benefit costs . . . $755 $820
Banks’ Thrift Plan contributions totaled $63 million for
the year ended December 31, 2004, and $64 million for
Accrued postretirement benefit costs are reported as a
the year ended December 31, 2003, and are reported as a
component of ‘‘Accrued benefit costs.’’
component of ‘‘Salaries and other benefits.’’
For measurement purposes, the assumed health care
cost trend rates at December 31 are as follows:
(9) Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions
and Postemployment Benefits
2004 2003
Postretirement Benefits Other Than Pensions Health care cost trend rate
assumed for next year .......... 9.00% 10.00%
In addition to the Reserve Banks’ retirement plans, Rate to which the cost trend is
assumed to decline
employees who have met certain age and length of ser­
(the ultimate trend rate) ......... 4.75% 5.00%
vice requirements are eligible for both medical benefits Year that the rate reaches the
and life insurance coverage during retirement. ultimate trend rate .............. 2011 2011
The Reserve Banks fund benefits payable under the
medical and life insurance plans as due and, accordingly, Assumed health care cost trend rates have a significant
have no plan assets. Net postretirement benefit costs are effect on the amounts reported for health care plans. A
actuarially determined using a January 1 measurement one percentage point change in assumed health care cost
date. trend rates would have the following effects for the year
ended December 31, 2004 (in millions):
Following is a reconciliation of the beginning and ending
balances of the benefit obligation (in millions): One percentage One percentage
point increase point decrease
2004 2003
Effect on aggregate
Accumulated postretirement benefit of service and
obligation at January 1 ........... $942 $742 interest cost
Service cost—benefits earned during components of
the period ....................... 19 18 net periodic
Interest cost of accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation ................ 52 50 benefit costs ........ $ 10 $ (8)
Actuarial loss ........................ 10 157 Effect on accumulated
Curtailment (gain)/loss ................ (2) 7 postretirement
Special termination loss ............... 1 2 benefit obligation . . . 105 (86)
Contributions by plan participants ..... 9 6
Benefits paid ......................... (50) (40)
Plan amendments ..................... (112) . . .
Accumulated postretirement benefit
obligation at December 31 ........ $869 $942

Federal Reserve Banks Combined Financial Statements 327
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
The following is a summary of the components of net Expected benefit payments:
periodic postretirement benefit costs for the years ended
December 31 (in millions): Without With
subsidy subsidy
2004 2003 2005 ............................. $ 45 $ 45
2006 ............................. 47 43
Service cost—benefits earned during 2007 ............................. 49 44
the period ........................ $ 19 $18 2008 ............................. 51 46
Interest cost of accumulated benefit 2009 ............................. 52 47
2010–2014 ........................ 288 257
obligation ........................ 52 50
Amortization of prior service cost ....... (17) (15) Total ............................. $532 $482
Recognized net actuarial loss ........... 8 4
Postemployment Benefits
Total periodic expense ................. 62 57
Curtailment (gain)/loss ................. (86) 5 The Reserve Banks offer benefits to former or inactive
Special termination loss ................ 1 2 employees. Postemployment benefit costs are actuarially
Net periodic postretirement determined using a December 31, 2004, measurement
benefit (credit)/costs .............. $(23) $64 date and include the cost of medical and dental insurance,
survivor income, and disability benefits. For 2004, the
Banks changed their practices for estimating postemploy­
At December 31, 2004 and 2003, the weighted-average ment costs and used a 5.25 percent discount rate and the
discount rate assumptions used to determine net periodic same health care trend rates as were used for projecting
postretirement benefit costs were 6.25 percent and 6.75 postretirement costs. Costs for 2003, however, were pro­
percent, respectively. jected using the same discount rate and health care trend
Net periodic postretirement benefit costs are reported rates as were used for projecting postretirement costs.
as a component of ‘‘Salaries and other benefits.’’ The accrued postemployment benefit costs recognized
A plan amendment that modified the credited service by the Banks at December 31, 2004 and 2003, were
period eligibility requirements created curtailment gains. $128 million and $130 million, respectively. This cost is
The recognition of special termination losses is primarily included as a component of ‘‘Accrued benefit costs.’’ Net
the result of enhanced retirement benefits provided to periodic postemployment benefit costs included in 2004
employees during the restructuring described in foot­ and 2003 operating expenses were $17 million and
note 10. $26 million, respectively.
The Medicare Prescription Drug, Improvement and
Modernization Act of 2003 (the Act) was enacted in 10. Business Restructuring Charges
December 2003. The Act established a prescription drug
benefit under Medicare (Medicare Part D) and a federal In 2003, several Banks announced consolidation and
subsidy to sponsors of retiree health care benefit plans restructuring plans to streamline operations and reduce
that provide benefits that are at least actuarially equiva­ costs, including consolidation of check operations and
lent to Medicare Part D. Following the guidance of the staff reductions in various functions. In 2004, addi­
Financial Accounting Standards Board, the Bank elected tional consolidation and restructuring initiatives were
to defer recognition of the financial effects of the Act announced in the check and fiscal services operations.
until further guidance was issued in May 2004. These actions resulted in the following business restruc­
Benefits provided to certain participants are at least turing charges:
actuarially equivalent to Medicare Part D. The estimated
effects of the subsidy, retroactive to January 1, 2004, are
reflected in actuarial loss in the accumulated postretire­
ment benefit obligation and net periodic postretirement
benefit costs.
Following is a summary of the effects of the expected
subsidy (in millions):
2004
Decrease in the accumulated postretirement
benefit obligation .......................... $120
Decrease in the net periodic postretirement
benefit costs ............................... 16

328 91st Annual Report, 2004
Notes to the Combined Financial Statements of the Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
Major categories of expense (in millions): Employee separation costs are primarily severance costs
related to identified staff reductions of approximately
Total 1,290, including some of the 1,483 staff reductions related
estimated to restructuring that was announced in 2003, and have not
costs been paid out. These costs are reported as a component of
Employee separation ........................ $61 ‘‘Salaries and other benefits.’’ Contract termination costs
Contract termination ........................ 1 include the charges resulting from terminating existing
Other ...................................... 1 lease and other contracts and are shown as a component
Total .................................. $63 of ‘‘Other expenses.’’
Restructing costs associated with the write-downs of
certain Bank assets, including software, buildings, lease-
Accrued Accrued hold improvements, furniture, and equipment are dis­
liability Total Total liability cussed in footnote 6. Costs associated with enhanced
12/31/03 charges paid 12/31/04 pension benefits for all Reserve Banks are discussed in
Employee footnote 8. Costs associated with enhanced postretirement
separation .... $29 $25 $(26) $28 benefits are disclosed in footnote 9.
Contract Future costs associated with the restructuring that are
termination . . . 1 . . . . . . 1 not estimable and are not recognized as liabilities will be
Other ........... . . . ... ... ... incurred in 2005 and 2006.
Total ...... $30 $25 $(26) $29 The Reserve Banks anticipate substantially completing
their announced restructuring plans by March 2006.

329
Office of Inspector General Activities
The Board’s Office of Inspector General and abuse in Board and Board-delegated
(OIG) functions in accordance with programs and operations, as well as in
the Inspector General Act of 1978, as activities administered or financed by
amended. In addition to retaining an the Board. The OIG keeps the Congress
independent auditor each year to audit and the Chairman of the Board fully
the Board’s financial statements, the informed about serious abuses and defi­
OIG plans and conducts audits and ciencies and about the status of any cor­
investigations of the Board’s programs rective actions.
and operations and its delegated func­ During 2004, the OIG completed
tions at the Federal Reserve Banks. The ten audits, reviews, and other assess­
OIG also reviews existing and proposed ments and conducted a number of
legislation and regulations for economy follow-up reviews to evaluate action
and efficiency. It recommends policies, taken on earlier recommendations. The
and it supervises and conducts activities OIG also closed nine investigations and
that promote economy and efficiency performed numerous legislative and
and that prevent and detect waste, fraud, regulatory reviews.
Audits, Reviews, and Assessments Completed during 2004
Report title Month issued
Audit of the FFIEC’s Financial Statements (Year Ended December 31, 2003) .................. February
Review of Internal Control Assessments Performed during Community Bank Examinations ..... March
Evaluation of Key Emergency Preparedness and Security Enhancements ....................... March
Audit of the Board’s Financial Statements (Year Ended December 31, 2003) ................... April
Audit of the Board’s Outsourcing Operations ................................................ April
Evaluation of the Fine Arts Program ......................................................... April
Evaluation of the Administrative Controls Over an Outsourced Contract ....................... June
Review of the Oversight Function of the Division of Reserve Bank Operations
and Payment Systems .................................................................. August
Audit of the Board’s Information Security Program ........................................... September
Audit of the Board’s Automated Travel System .............................................. November

330
Government Accountability Office Reviews
Under the Federal Banking Agency concerning the Federal Reserve were in
Audit Act (Public Law 95–320), most various stages of completion at year­
Federal Reserve System operations are end. The Federal Reserve also provided
under the purview of the Government information to the GAO during the year
Accountability Office (GAO). In 2004, in relation to numerous other GAO
the GAO completed six reports on investigations.
selected aspects of Federal Reserve The completed reports are available
operations. In addition, five projects directly from the GAO.
Reports Completed during 2004
Month issued
Report title Report number
(2004)
Consumer Protection: Federal and State Agencies Face Challenges
in Combating Predatory Lending ................................... GAO-04-280 January
Federal Reserve Banks: Areas for Improvement in Computer Controls ..... GAO-04-336R March
Coins and Currency: How the Costs and Earnings Associated
with Producing Coins and Currency Are Budgeted and
Accounted For .................................................... GAO-04-283 April
Regulatory Information Sharing: Better Information Sharing
among Financial Services Regulators Could Improve Protections
for Consumers .................................................... GAO-04-882R June
Foreign Regimes’ Assets: The United States Faces Challenges
in Recovering Assets, but Has Mechanisms that Could Guide
Future Efforts ..................................................... GAO-04-1006 September
Financial Regulation: Industry Changes Prompt Need to Reconsider
GAO-05-61 October
U.S. Regulatory Structure ..........................................
Projects Active at Year-End 2004
Month initiated
Subject of project
(2004)
USA Patriot Act implementation ........................................................ January
Bank Secrecy Act examinations ......................................................... January
Industrial loan corporations ............................................................. May
Information security at financial organizations ........................................... November
Consumer impact on remittance transfer system .......................................... December

Maps of the
Federal Reserve System

332 91st Annual Report, 2004
The Federal Reserve System
9 1
MINNEAPOLIS 2
BOSTON
7
12 CHICAGO 3 NEWYORK
SAN FRANCISCO 10
CL
4
EV ELAND PHILADELPHIA
KANSAS CITY
RICHMOND
ST. LOUIS
5
8
6
11 ATLANTA
DALLAS
ALASKA
HAWAII
Legend
Both pages Facing page
Federal Reserve Bank city • Federal Reserve Branch city
Board of Governors of the Federal Branch boundary
Reserve System, Washington, D.C.
Note
The Federal Reserve officially identifies Bank serves the Commonwealth of
Districts by number and by Reserve Puerto Rico and the U.S. Virgin Islands;
Bank city (shown on both pages) and by the San Francisco Bank serves Ameri­
letter (shown on the facing page). can Samoa, Guam, and the Common­
In the 12th District, the Seattle wealth of the Northern Mariana Islands.
Branch serves Alaska, and the San Fran­ The maps show the boundaries within
cisco Bank serves Hawaii. the System as of year-end 2004.
The System serves commonwealths
and territories as follows: The New York

Maps of the Federal Reserve System 333
1–A 2–B 3–C 4–D 5–E
ME Pittsburgh Baltimore MD
NY
PA
CT PA NJ OH VA
VT WV WV NC
NH Buffalo Cincinnati Charlotte
DE
MA
CT RI NJ NY KY SC
BOSTON NEW YORK PHILADELPHIA CLEVELAND RICHMOND
6–F 7–G 8–H
Nashville
TN
KY
Birmingham AL MI
WI IL IN
Detroit Louisville
MS GA IA MO
TN
LA Jacksonville AR Memphis
IL
New Orleans FL IN Little
Rock MS
Miami
ATLANTA CHICAGO ST. LOUIS
9–I
MT
ND MN
Helena
MI
WI
SD
MINNEAPOLIS
10–J 12–L
WY
NE
CO Omaha
MO
Denver KS ALASKA
WA
Seattle
NM
Oklahoma City
Portland
OK
OR
KANSAS CITY ID
CA
11–K NV
TX
Salt Lake City
NM
LA UT
El Paso
Houston
Los Angeles
San Antonio
HAWAII
AZ
DALLAS SAN FRANCISCO

Index

337
Index
Agreement corporations, examinations Banking organizations, U.S.
of, 95–96 Examinations and inspections of, 88–90
American Jobs Creation Act, 16 Financial reporting, transparency, 105
Anti-money-laundering initiatives, Foreign operations, 95–96, 100–102
examinations for, 90, 99 Number of, 298
Applications, processing of, 62–63, 111, Overseas investments by, 112–13
114 Regulation of, 110–14
Asset-backed commercial paper (ABCP), Risk-focused supervision of, 93–94
97–98 Bank Merger Act, 111–12
Assets and liabilities Bank-owned life insurance (BOLI), 99
Board of Governors, 304 Bank Secrecy Act, examinations, 90, 99,
Commercial banks, 289 102
Basel Committee on Banking Supervision,
Federal Reserve Banks, 266–69, 315
102–4
ATM (automated teller machine) card use,
Basel II framework, implementation, 98,
61
100–101
Auditors’ reports, 301, 303, 312–14
BHCPRs (Bank Holding Company
Audits, reviews, and assessments, Office of
Performance Reports), 94
Inspector General, 329
Board of Governors (See also Federal
Automated clearinghouse services, Federal
Reserve System)
Reserve Banks, 121–22, 285
Applications, processing of, 113
Automated Standard Application for
Assets and liabilities of, 304
Payment, 126
Audits of, 303–13, 321, 327
Availability of Funds and Collection of
Consumer Advisory Council, 75–77, 240
Checks (Regulation CC), 72, 150
Decisions, public notice, 113
Ex officio members, 264
Balance sheets
Federal Advisory Council, 239
Board of Governors, 304
Federal legislative proposals, 141–43
Federal Reserve priced services, 132–35
FFIEC activities, 66, 106–7
Bank credit, 26
Financial statements of, 303–13
Bank examiner training, 66–67
Government Performance and Results
Bank holding companies
Act, 137–39
Application procedure, 110–11 Inspector General, Office of, audits,
Banks affiliated with, 298 reviews, and assessments, 329
Examinations and inspections of, 88–91 Litigation, 231–32
Rating system, 99, 151 Members and officers, lists, 235–37,
Regulatory financial reports of, 105–6 261–64
Stock repurchases by, 113 Outreach activities, 83–84
Surveillance by Federal Reserve System, Policy actions by, 147–53
94 Rules of practice for hearings, 150
Bank Holding Companies and Change in Thrift Institutions Advisory Council, 241
Bank Control (Regulation Y), 148 Training and development, staff and
Bank Holding Company Act, 110–11 bank examiners, 66–67, 108–9
Bank Holding Company Performance BOLI (Bank-owned life insurance), 99
Reports (BHCPRs), 94 BOND (Banking Organization National
Banking Organization National Desktop Desktop), 108
(BOND), 108 Bonds, 126, 288

338 91st Annual Report, 2004
Borrowers of Securities Credit Community Reinvestment Act (CRA)
(Regulation X), 288 Compliance examinations, 62
Branches, Federal Reserve Banks, 242–43, Mergers and acquisitions, applications
284–85 for, 62–63
BSA (Bank Secrecy Act), 90, 99, 102 Review of, 76
Business continuity, 90–91 Supervision for compliance, 62–63
Business spending, investment, and
Technical changes to, 149
finance, 14–21, 36–44
Community Reinvestment (Regulation BB),
149
CAESAR (Complaint Analysis
Complaint Analysis Evaluation System and
Evaluation System and Reports), 73
Reports (CAESAR), 73
Call Reports, 106
Compliance examinations, 63–67, 69–73
Capital
Condition statements, Federal Reserve
Accounts, Federal Reserve Banks,
Banks, 266–69, 315
266–69, 315
‘‘Consolidated Know-Your-Customer Risk
Changes in, Federal Reserve Banks, 317
Management,’’ policy paper, 102–3
Flows, 19, 42
Consumer Advisory Council, 75–77, 240
Standards, 97–98, 102
Consumer and community affairs
Cash flows, Board of Governors, 306
Cash management services, 127 Community economic development,
Cash-recirculation policy, 123–24 77–83
Change in Bank Control Act, 112 Consumer Advisory Council, advice,
Check Clearing for the 21st Century Act 75–77
(Check 21), 66, 117, 118 Consumer complaints, 73–75
Check collection and processing, 120–21, Financial education, 78–79, 82–83
285 Outreach activities, 83–84
Citizens Financial Group, merger, 63 Statutes to inform and protect
Civil money penalties, Federal Reserve consumers, 55–62
enforcement of, 92–93 Supervision for compliance with laws,
Collection of Checks and Other Items by 62–73
Federal Reserve Banks and Funds Consumer complaints, 73–75
Transfers through Fedwire Consumer financial education, 78–79,
(Regulation J), 148 82–83
Collection services, Federal Reserve Banks, Consumer information, reporting and
126–27 solicitation of, 56–57, 59–60
Combined financial statements, Federal Consumer Leasing (Regulation M), 70, 147
Reserve Banks, 314–27
Consumer price index (CPI), 22, 44
Commercial and industrial loans, 14–15, 85
Consumer prices, 21–23, 44
Commercial banks
Consumer protection laws, compliance
Assets and liabilities of, 289
with, 63–73
Developments, 85
Consumer spending, 10–11, 35
Financial reports, 106
Corporate profits, 14–15, 38–39
Number of, 298
CRA (See Community Reinvestment Act)
Commercial-mortgage-backed securities
Credit
(CMBS), 15, 39
Commercial paper, asset-backed, programs, Rates, primary, secondary, and seasonal,
97–98 151–52, 286
Community affairs (See Consumer and Reports and solicitations, 57, 59–60
community affairs) State member banks to executive
Community banks, supervision of, 94 officers, 115
Community economic development, Credit by Banks, Brokers, and Dealers
promotion of, 77–83 (Regulation T), 288

Index 339
Credit by Banks for the Purpose of Economy, U.S. developments—Continued
Purchasing or Carrying Margin Stocks Interest rates, 5, 24–25, 46–47
(Regulation U), 288 Labor market, 20–23, 42–46
‘‘Credit Risk Transfer,’’ Joint Forum paper, Monetary aggregates, 26–27, 48
103 Monetary policy, 3–7, 31–34
Currency and coin, operations and Prices, 21–23, 44
developments in, 123–24, 285, 291, Projections, 7–8, 34
293, 295, 315 Edge Act corporations, examinations of,
95–96
Data, home mortgage lending, 67, 71 Education, financial, 78–79, 82–83
Debit card use, 61–62 Electronic access and payments services,
Debit fees, 58–59 126, 127
Debt, 26, 47–48 Electronic Check Processing program,
Debt services, 124–26 126–27
Demand deposits, interest on, 141–42 Electronic Federal Tax Payment System
Depository institutions (EFTPS), 126
Compliance with EFTA, 58 Electronic Fund Transfer Act (EFTA),
Home mortgage disclosure data, 68 58–59, 61–62, 70
Interest on balances held at Federal Electronic Fund Transfers (Regulation E),
Reserve Banks, 141 70, 147
Interest rates on loans, Federal Reserve Electronic fund transfer use and services,
Banks, 286 61, 121–22
Reserve requirements, exemption Emerging-market economies, 29–30, 50–51
threshold increased, 61 Employment, 20–21, 42–43
Reserves held, 142, 287, 290–97 Employment cost index (ECI), 21, 43–44
Services to, Federal Reserve Banks, Energy prices, 22, 44
124–27 Enforcement actions, Federal Reserve
Depository services to other agencies by System, 92–93
Federal Reserve Banks, 124–27 Equal Credit Opportunity (Regulation B),
Deposits 69–70, 147
Federal Reserve Banks, 266–69, 291, Equipment and software investment, 12–13,
293 37
Insured commercial banks, 289 Equity markets and prices, 25–26, 47
Directors, Federal Reserve Banks and Examinations and inspections
Branches, list, 244–60 Anti–money laundering, 90
Disclosures by state member banks, 114 Bank holding companies, 88–90
Disclosure tables for reporting HMDA Community Reinvestment Act,
data, 61 compliance with, 62
Discount rate (See also Interest rates), Consumer protection laws, compliance
151–53, 286 with, 63–73
Disposable personal income (DPI), 10, 35 Fair lending laws, compliance with,
Dollar exchange rate, 28, 49–50 64–65
Dollar Wi$e initiative, 79 Federal Reserve Banks, 128–29
FFIEC procedures, 66
ECI (See Employment cost index) Financial holding companies, 90
Economy, international, 27–30, 48–51 Financial system continuity, 90–91
Economy, U.S. developments International banking activities, 95–96
Business sector, 12–15, 36–39 Specialized, 91–92
External sector, 18–20, 41–42 State member banks, 88, 89, 95
Financial markets, 4–7, 23–27, 46–48 Supervisory policy, 97–107
Government sector, 15–18, 39–41 Training for bank examiners, 66–67
Household sector, 10–12, 35–36 Transfer agents, 91

340 91st Annual Report, 2004
Examinations and inspections—Continued Federal Reserve Banks—Continued
U.S. banking organizations, foreign Chairmen, conference of, 243
operations, 95 Check collection service, commercial,
Expenses (See Income and expenses) 120–21
Exports, 18, 41 Checks handled, 285
External sector, developments in, 18–20, Collection services, government, 126–27
41–42 Condition statements of, 266–69, 315
Conference of Chairmen, Presidents, and
Fair and Accurate Credit Transactions First Vice Presidents, 243–44
Act (FACT Act), 55–57 Credit outstanding, 290–97
Fair Credit Reporting Act (FCRA), 59–60 Currency and coin, operations and
Fair Credit Reporting (Regulation V), developments in, 123–24, 285, 291,
148–49 293, 295, 314
Fair lending laws, compliance with, 64–65 Depository institution balances, interest
Federal Advisory Council, members and on, 141
officers, 239 Depository services, 124–27
Federal agency securities and obligations Deposits, 266–69
Depository institution holdings, 289 Directors of, 244–60
Federal Reserve Bank holdings, 266–69, Discount rate, 151–53, 286
274, 276–79, 290, 292, 294, 296 Electronic access and payments services,
Federal Financial Institutions Examination 126, 127
Council (FFIEC), 66, 68, 106–7 Examinations of, 128–29
Federal funds rate, 5–7, 32, 191, 200, 207, Examiners, training, 66–67
215, 222, 229 Federal Reserve decisions, public notice
Federal government, economic of, 96
developments, 15–17, 39–40 FedLine Advantage, 127
Federal Open Market Committee (FOMC) Fedwire Funds Service, 122
Authorizations, 155, 157, 162–65 Fedwire Securities Service, 122–23
Directives, 157, 159, 165–66, 191, 200, Financial statements of, combined,
207, 215, 222, 229 314–27
Foreign currency operations, procedural First Vice Presidents, conference of, 244
instructions, 159–60, 166–75 Fiscal agency services, 124–27
Guidelines for open market operations, Float, 123, 290, 292, 294, 296
157 Food coupon services, 285
Meetings, minutes of, 155, 160, 175, Foreign banks, U.S. activities of,
183, 192, 200, 208, 215, 222 supervision, 96
Members and officers, list, 238 Government depository services, 124–27
Notation votes, 183, 222 Holdings of securities and loans, 130,
System Open Market Account, 157, 158, 266–69, 274, 290, 292, 294, 296
163, 164 Income and expenses of, 129, 134–35,
Federal Reserve Banks 276–83, 316
Acquisition costs, 284 Information technology developments,
Assessments by Board of Governors, 127–28
278, 280, 282 Initiatives, 117–18
Assets and liabilities of, 266–69, 315 Interest rates on loans to depository
Audit of, 315 institutions, 286
Automated clearinghouse services, National Settlement Service, 122
121–22 Noncash collection service, 123
Bond services, 126 Officers and employees, number of, 275
Branches of, 242–43 Officers of, 242–43
Capital, changes in, 317 Operations in principal departments, 285
Cash, 123, 127 Payments to the U.S. Treasury, 278–79

Index 341
Federal Reserve Banks—Continued Federal Reserve System—Continued
Premises of, 130–31, 284–85 Specialized examinations, 91–92
Presidents, conference of, 243 Staff development, 66–67, 108–9
Priced services, 118–23, 132–35 Supervision and regulation
Profit and loss, 276 responsibilities, 62–73, 87–88
Salaries of officers and employees, 275 Supervision of international banking
Securities and loans, holdings of, 124, organizations, 95–96
130, 276–77 Supervisory policy, 97–107
Treasury Tax and Loan program, 127 Surveillance, 94–95
Federal Reserve Electronic Tax Application Technical assistance, 96–97
(FR-ETA), 126 Training, staff and examiners, 66–67,
Federal Reserve fifty dollar note, 123 108–9
Federal Reserve System (See also Board of Transparency enhancement efforts, 105
Governors) Federal sector, developments in, 15–17,
Anti-money-laundering examinations, 90 39–40
Applications to establish banking Federal tax payments, 126
institutions, processing of, 113–14 FedLine Advantage, 127
Bank holding company regulatory Fedwire Funds Service, 122
financial reports to, 105–6 Fedwire Securities Service, 122–23
Banks and Branches, list of, 242–43 FFIEC (Federal Financial Institutions
Basel Committee activities, 102–4 Examination Council), 66, 68, 106–7
Capital adequacy standards, 97–98, 102 Fiduciary activities, supervision of, 91
Decisions, public notice of, 113 Fifty dollar note, issuance, 123
Edge Act and agreement corporations, Finance
examinations of, 95–96 Business, 14–15, 38–39
Enforcement actions, 92–93 Household, 12, 36
Enforcement of laws and regulations, Financial Crimes Enforcement Network
114–15 (FinCEN), 106
Examinations and inspections, 88–90 ‘‘Financial Disclosure in the Banking,
Executive officers, credit to, 115 Insurance and Securities Sectors:
Financial system continuity initiatives, Issues and Analysis,’’ Joint Forum
90–91 paper, 104
Government Accountability Office, Financial statements
reviews by, 330 Board of Governors, 303–13
International guidance on supervisory Federal Reserve Banks, combined,
policies, 102–4 314–27
International supervision, 95–97 Federal Reserve priced services, 132–35
Maps of, 332–33 Financial system
Membership, 115 Account, 19–20, 42
Monitoring supervisory data, off-site, Continuity initiatives, 90–91
94–95 Developments, 34–51
Open market transactions, 270–73 Education, 78–79, 82–83
Processing of applications, 114 Holding companies, inspections and
Regulation of U.S. banking structure, examinations of, 90
110–14 Intermediation, 26–27, 47–48
Risk management and supervision, Markets, 4–7, 23–27, 32–34, 46–48
93–94, 102–3 Reports, bank holding companies and
Safety and soundness supervision commercial banks, 105–6
responsibilities, 88–97 FinCEN (See Financial Crimes
Sarbanes–Oxley Act, 104 Enforcement Network)
Securities credit responsibilities, 114 Fiscal agency services, by Federal Reserve
Special investigations, 92–93 Banks, 124–27

342 91st Annual Report, 2004
Fiscal Impact Tool (FIT), web-based ‘‘Implementation of Basel II: Practical
resource, 83 Considerations,’’ policy paper, 103
Fixed investment, business sector, 12–13, Imports, 18–19, 41–42
36–37 Income and expenses
Float, 123, 290, 292, 294, 296 Board of Governors, 305
Flood insurance, compliance with, 65–66 Federal Reserve Banks, 129, 134–35,
FOMC (See Federal Open Market 276–83, 316
Committee) Federal Reserve priced services, 118–35,
Foreign banking operations of U.S. banks, 276
95–96, 100–102 Industrial economies, developments, 28–29,
Foreign banks, U.S. activities of, 96 49–50
Foreign currency operations Inflation, 8, 9, 23, 31, 32, 44–46
Authorizations for, 157–59, 164–65 Information technology
Directives, 159, 165–66 Developments in, 107–8, 127–28
Procedural instructions for, 159–60, Federal Reserve examination of, 91
166–75 Supervisory Information Technology
Foreign economies, developments in, (SIT), 107–8
27–30, 48–51 Inspections (See Examinations and
Foreign trade, 18–19, 41–42 inspections)
FR-ETA, 126 Inspector General, Office of (OIG), audits,
reviews, and assessments, 329
GDP (gross domestic product), 8, 9, Insured commercial banks, assets and
39–40 liabilities, 289
Gold stock, 290, 292, 294, 296 Interest rates, See also Discount rate and
Government Federal funds rate, 5, 24–25, 46–47,
Depository services, 124–27 286
Developments in, 15–18, 39–41 International Banking Act, 112
Federal, economic developments, 15–17, International Banking Operations
39–40 (Regulation K), 148
Municipal securities dealers and brokers, International developments
examination of, 92 Banking activities, supervision of,
Securities, examinations of, 92 95–96, 98, 102–4, 112–13
State and local, economic developments, Economic developments, 27–30, 48–51
17–18, 40–41 Trade, 18–19, 41–42
Government Accountability Office (GAO), Interstate branching, 142–43
330 Investments
Government Performance and Results Act Business sector, 12–14, 36–37
(GPRA), 137–39 Inventory, 14, 37–38
Gross domestic product (GDP), 8, 9, 39–40 Overseas, by U.S. organizations, 112–13
Residential, 11–12, 35–36
Hearings, rules of practice, 150
Home Mortgage Disclosure Act (HMDA), Jobs and Growth Tax Relief
61, 67–69 Reconciliation Act (JGTRRA), 10,
Home Mortgage Disclosure (Regulation C), 16, 39
147
Household sector, developments in, 10–12, Labor market, 20–23, 42–44
35–36 Large, complex banking organizations
Housing and Urban Development, (LCBOs), supervision of, 93–94
Department of, complaint referrals, 75 Legislation, Federal, proposals, 141–43
Liabilities (See Assets and liabilities)
Immigrant banking services, 80–81 Life insurance, bank-owned, 99

Index 343
Litigation involving Board of Governors Monetary Policy Reports to the Congress
Albrecht, 232 February 2005, 3–30
Apffel, 232 July 2004, 31–51
Artis, 232 Money laundering prevention, 90, 99
Carter, 232 Money market deposit accounts (MMDAs),
CB Bancshares, Inc., 231 86
Fraternal Order of Police, 232 Mortgage interest rates, 11, 12, 36
Haili, 231 Municipal securities dealers and brokers,
Inner City Press/Community on the examination of, 92
Move, 231
Laigo, 232 National City Corporation, merger, 63
McCarthy, 231 National Flood Insurance Act of 1968,
Price, 232 65–66
Sciba, 232 National Information Center (NIC), 107–8
Skanska USA Building, Inc., 232 National Settlement Service, 122
Texas State Bank, 232 NewAlliance Bancshares, merger, 63
Thomas, 231, 232 Noncash collection services, Federal
Reserve Banks, 123
Ulrich, 231
Nonfarm business sector, 21, 44
Loans
Nonmember banks, assets and liabilities,
Federal Reserve Bank holdings, 130,
289, 298
290, 292, 294, 296
Notes, Federal Reserve
Insured commercial banks, 289
Fifty dollar bill issuance, 123
Interest rates for depository institutions,
Interest, 281, 283
286
Operations, 123–24, 285, 291, 293, 295,
State member banks to executive
315
officers, 115
Local governments, 17–18, 40–41
Officers, Board of Governors (See
Members and officers)
Maps, Federal Reserve System, 332–33
OIG, 329
Margin requirements, 288
Oil prices, 19, 42
Member banks (See also State member
Open market operations
banks)
Authorization for conduct of, 155–57,
Applications by, 113
162–64
Assets and liabilities, 289
Guidelines for the conduct of, 157
Number of, 115, 298
Volume of transactions, 270–73
Reserves, 295, 297
Opt-out provisions, prescreened
Members and officers solicitations, 59–60
Board of Governors, 235–37, 261–64 ‘‘Outsourcing in Financial Services,’’ Joint
Consumer Advisory Council, 240 Forum paper, 103–4
Federal Advisory Council, 239 Overdraft protection services, 77
Federal Open Market Committee, 238 Overseas investments, U.S. banking
Federal Reserve Banks and Branches, organizations, 112
242–43
Salaries, Federal Reserve Banks, 275 Papers, interagency or Joint Forum
Thrift Institutions Advisory Council, 241 papers, 102–4
Membership of State Banking Institutions Pay.gov, 126
in the Federal Reserve System Payments services, by Federal Reserve
(Regulation H), 148 Banks, 126
Monetary aggregates (M2), 26, 48 Payments system risk, 150–51
Monetary policy, economic outlook, 3–8, Performance Report Information and
31–34 Surveillance Monitoring (PRISM), 94

344 91st Annual Report, 2004
Personal consumption expenditures (PCE), Regulations—Continued
8–10, 22, 34, 44 U, Credit by Banks for the Purpose of
PIN fees, 58–59 Purchasing or Carrying Margin
Point-of-sale debit fees, 58–59 Stocks, 288
Policy actions and statements, 97–102, V, Fair Credit Reporting, 148–49
147–51 X, Borrowers of Securities Credit, 288
Premises, Federal Reserve Banks, 130–31, Y, Bank Holding Companies and Change
284, 315 in Bank Control, 148
Prescreened credit solicitations, 59–60 Z, Truth in Lending, 60, 61, 71, 147,
Priced services 149
Federal Reserve Banks, 118–23, 132–35 AA, Unfair or Deceptive Acts or
Prices Practices, 72
BB, Community Reinvestment, 149
Consumer, 21–23, 44
CC, Availability of Funds and Collection
Energy, 22, 44
of Checks, 72, 150
Equity, 25, 47
DD, Truth in Savings, 72–73, 147
Primary credit rate, 151, 286
Remittance services, immigrant markets,
‘‘Principles for the Home–Host
80–81
Recognition of AMA Operational Risk
Reports of Condition and Income (Call
Capital,’’ policy paper, 103
Reports), 106
‘‘Principles for the Management and
Repurchase agreements
Supervision of Interest Rate Risk,’’
Federal Reserve Bank credit, 290, 292,
policy paper, 103
294, 296
PRISM, 94
Treasury securities, 274
Privacy of Consumer Financial Information
Reserve requirements, depository
(Regulation P), 70–71
institutions, 142, 287, 290–97
Productivity and labor costs, 21, 43–44
Reserve Requirements of Depository
Profit and loss, Federal Reserve Banks, 276
Institutions (Regulation D), 147
Profits, corporate, 14–15, 38–39
Residential investment, 11–12, 35–36
Revenue and income (See Income and
Regional banking organizations, risk
expenses)
supervision of, 93
Risk capital, 97–99
Regions Financial Corporation, merger, 63
Risk-focused supervision, Federal Reserve
Regulations
System, 93–94
B, Equal Credit Opportunity, 69–70, 147
Risk management, Federal Reserve System,
C, Home Mortgage Disclosure, 147 102–3, 151
D, Reserve Requirements of Depository Royal Bank of Scotland, merger, 63
Institutions, 147 Rules of Practice for Hearings, 150
E, Electronic Fund Transfers, 70, 147
H, Membership of State Banking Salaries, Federal Reserve Bank officers
Institutions in the Federal Reserve and employees, 275
System, 148 Sarbanes–Oxley Act, 104
J, Collection of Checks and Other Items Secondary and seasonal credit rates, 152,
by Federal Reserve Banks and 286
Funds Transfers through Fedwire, Securities (See also Treasury securities)
148 Clearing agencies, examination of, 91–92
K, International Banking Operations, 148 Credit lenders, examination of, 92, 114
M, Consumer Leasing, 70, 147 Government and municipal, supervision
P, Privacy of Consumer Financial of dealers and brokers, 92
Information, 70–71 Holdings by Federal Reserve Banks,
T, Credit by Banks, Brokers and Dealers, 130, 290, 292, 294, 296
288 Trust-preferred, 98

Index 345
Settlement Service, National, Federal Technical assistance, 96–97
Reserve Banks, 122 Term Investment Option (TIO), 127
SIT, 107–8 Thrift Institutions Advisory Council, 241
SOMA (See System Open Market Account) Trade, international, 18–19, 41–42
Special drawing rights certificate account, Training and development, Federal Reserve
266–69, 290, 292, 294, 296, 315 staff, 66–67, 108–9
Special investigations, Federal Reserve Transfer agents, supervision of, 91–92
System, 232 Transparency efforts, 105
Staff development, Federal Reserve, 66–67, Treasury, U.S. Department of the, See also
108–9 Treasury securities
State and local governments, 17–18, 40–41 Currency outstanding, 290, 292, 294,
State-chartered banks, 150, 298 296
State member banks (See also Member Payments processed for, 126
banks) Payments to, by Federal Reserve Banks,
Applications by, 113 129, 278, 281, 283
Community Reinvestment Act, TreasuryDirect, 125
compliance with, 62 Treasury securities
Complaints against, 73–75 Depository institution holdings, by class
Disclosure by, 114 of bank, 289
Examinations of, 62, 66–67, 88, 91, 92 Federal Reserve Bank holdings, 124,
Extensions of credit to executive 274, 276–79, 290, 292, 294, 296
officers, 115 Interest rates, 24–25, 46–47
Number of, 115, 298 Open market transactions, 270–73
Securities clearing agents, 91–92 Repurchase agreements, 266–69, 270–73,
Surveillance by Federal Reserve System, 274, 290, 292, 294, 296
94–95 Treasury Tax and Loan (TT&L) program,
Transfer agents, 91–92 127
Statistical tables, 266–98 Trust-preferred securities, 98
Stocks Truth in Lending (Regulation Z), 60, 61,
Margin requirements, 288 71, 147, 149
Price indexes, 25, 26 Truth in Savings (Regulation DD), 72–73,
Repurchases, bank holding companies, 147
113
Supervision and regulation responsibilities, Unemployment, 8, 20–21, 42–43
Federal Reserve System, 85–115 Unfair and deceptive practices, 58, 72, 75,
Supervisory Information Technology (SIT), 150
107–8 Unfair or Deceptive Acts or Practices
Supervisory policy papers, 102–3 (Regulation AA), 72
Surveillance monitoring, 94–95 Unsolicited credit offers, 59–60
System Open Market Account (SOMA),
(See also Open market operations), Wachovia Corporation, merger, 63
157, 158, 163, 164 West Texas intermediate (WTI), prices, 19,
42
Tax payment services, electronic, 126 Working Families Tax Relief Act, 16
0405